For his impressive effort, Cruz will be crowned by a certain American constituency. Photograph: UPI /Landov /Barcroft Media In the sense that the Senate is a space for windbags to blow hard, Ted Cruz has over the last two days elevated the institution to within historic reach of its perfect self. Cruz, a Republican from Texas, spoke from 2.40pm ET Tuesday to 12.03pm ET Wednesday, his speech interrupted only by "questions" from friendly senators who dropped in to show their support. Few – literally three people ever, so far – have held the floor longer, and arguably none has ever spouted such a pure mist of intellectually disingenuous, self-aggrandizing spritz. It is the stuff of which legends are made, and Cruz, with his speech, took a step to becoming a Senate legend. In a political climate that prizes zeal above all virtue, Cruz proved a zeal that no articulation of an idea or voting record could demonstrate. He proved it with his feet and back and legs. He proved it with his spine. He proved it with his apparently steel-clad bladder. This will help Cruz For his impressive effort, Cruz will be crowned by a certain American constituency, the lesser zealot kings, who until now have had to make do with leaders who have one after another failed in their resolve, sold out, quit the governorship or left elected office for a lobby or a think tank. All appearances are that Cruz will run for president in 2016. When primary voters queue in Iowa and New Hampshire and South Carolina, this night will be remembered, and it will accrue in Cruz's favor. It will not, however, end Obamacare The intermittent topic of Cruz's speech is Obamacare, the healthcare law passed in 2010 and upheld by the Supreme Court in 2012. On Monday the House of Representatives passed a budget bill with a provision to "defund" the president's health law (a symbolic gambit with serious practical hurdles). On Wednesday afternoon the Senate is scheduled to vote to take up the House bill. Then the Senate leader, Harry Reid, Democrat of Nevada, will toss out the "defund" part and Obamacare will live on. It's not like what Wendy Davis' did in Texas What Cruz ostensibly tried to do is prevent the Senate from taking up the House bill. However under Senate rules he must cede the floor when the previously scheduled afternoon vote comes up. That's why Cruz's speech was not technically a filibuster; he did not have indefinite control of the floor. Control of the floor is what lent such drama to a filibuster undertaken in June by Texas state senator Wendy Davis. By speaking for 11 hours straight, over the jeers of colleagues and cheers of supporters, Davis prevented a vote on a bill placing tight new restrictions on abortion. Davis was carried off the field as a hero, although the state legislature eventually passed the bill which was signed into (likely unconstitutional) law. Wendy Davis celebrates with state senator Jose Rodriguez after her filibuster. Photograph: Erich Schlegel/Getty Images It doesn't matter that this is not technically a filibuster The fact that Cruz stood to gain no legislative victory leaves him, in this most dramatic moment of his own creation, open to accusations of self-service, as opposed to public service. The details of the Senate rules are not, however, likely to be remembered in all this, just as the substance of the healthcare law was not up for debate in the hours upon hours that Cruz supposedly talked about it. What will be remembered was the endurance and zeal of Ted Cruz. Which will engender in some Americans an admiration and gratitude they may hope to repay in votes.