12.15pm ET And so the stalemate continues. Earlier this morning, House speaker John Boehner stated that President Obama's refusal to negotiate on raising the debt ceiling wouldn't fly with his conference. He and his leadership team have drawn up a list of items they want in exchange for raising the debt ceiling, including a one-year delay in the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, tax reform instructions (based on congressman Paul Ryan's budget "principles"), greenlighting the Keystone XL pipeline, other "energy and regulatory reforms," and other spending "reform" measures on both discretionary and mandatory programs. Meanwhile, President Obama delivered a speech to promote the Affordable Care Act and the online health insurance exchanges for which enrollment will begin October 1. After outlining the basics of how the exchanges will work, he turned his attention to politics. He was in a jovial mood for much of it, mocking many of the Republicans' doom-and-gloom predictions regarding the law that have yet to come to fruition. As for the debt ceiling, he reiterated his position that "I will not negotiate on anything when it comes to the full faith and credit of the United States of America." He made sure to stress the "on anything" in his delivery, too, indicating that attempts to delay or defund the Affordable Care Act aren't the only problem here. The more immediate concern before the debt ceiling, of course, is funding the government, as spending authority will run out at the end of September 30. Speaker Boehner wouldn't show his cards on this, either, in his press conference. When a reporter asked if he would bring a "clean" continuing resolution - a spending bill that funds the Affordable Care Act - to a House vote, Boehner said he doesn't "see that happening." He refused to answer any questions on what he would do, then, saying first he would wait for the senate to pass its spending bill, which it is expected to do within the next few days. So the stakes are just as high as ever, and no one is budging. Are we having fun yet? Ugh.