A red traffic light in front of the Capitol building in Washington before the US federal government partially shut down. Photograph: James Lawler Duggan/Reuters 1. US government begins shutdown after Congress debates end in stalemate Recriminations fly as Republican rancour over Obamacare leads to first federal shutdown in two decades 2. Ed Miliband pays high price for forcing Daily Mail to carry his right of reply Newspaper seizes the opportunity to reprint the piece, about Miliband's father Ralph, that caused offence - along with a further attack in its leader column 3. Edward Snowden submits speech via intermediary to European Parliament Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs 'Economies are built on creativity, curiosity - and privacy,' says whistleblower. Follow the story as it unfolds in our live blog 4. Boris Johnson makes uncharacteristically low-key speech to Conservative party conference London mayor manages to avoid saying anything that could be construed as disloyal to David Cameron. Follow the rest of the action from the Conservative party conference on our live blog 5. GP surgeries to open seven days a week PM risks clash with GPs with plan to open surgeries from 8am-8pm and at weekends to relieve pressure on A&Es 6. Dubai case raises new questions for Sheikh Mohammed Endurance horse trainer banned for doping continues to train thoroughbreds for Godolphin's owner 7. Rape prosecutions will keep falling if corners keep being cut As long as we have a prime minister who can't decide if he's a feminist, things will only get worse for victims of sexual violence, writes Emily Thornberry 8. How to stop worrying and write proper Guardian Style Guide author David Marsh set out to master perfect grammatical English – but discovered that 'correct' isn't always best. Here are the 10 grammar laws you can forget 9. More than the sum of her parts Breasts, bums, blokes and their bits – Sarah Lucas's riotous new show at London's Whitechapel gallery lets it all hang out. And the result is strangely disturbing, writes Adrian Searle Picture of the day Thai farmers rescue their pigs from flooding in Phitsanulok province, northern Thailand, 01 October 2013. Photograph: Stringer/EPA