7.31am BST The Ohio Clock outside the Senate Chamber on Capitol Hill at 12:01 am this morning, as the shutdown was triggered. Photograph: Evan Vucci/AP Ladies and Gentlemen, we have shutdown. A couple of hours ago, the US government began closing down non-essential services and putting hundreds of thousands of "non essential workers" on unpaid leave, in the first such shutdown in17 years .  Despite last-minute negotiations that ran up to midnight, the US House of Representatives and the Senate proved unable to agree a budget for the new financial year, which began today. With Republicans insisting on cuts to President Obama's Affordable Care Act, and Democrats refusing to budge, time simply ran out. It's the first shutdown in 17 years, and the impact could be felt across the global economy. Our Washington bureau chief, Dan Roberts, explains how the shutdown was triggered: As a midnight deadline to extend Congressional spending authority ticked ever closer, Republicans staged a series of last-ditch efforts to use a once-routine budget procedure to force Democrats to abandon their efforts to extend US health insurance. Three separate attacks on the Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare, were staged by the House of Representatives, only to be rejected in turn by the Democrat-controlled Senate, which accused Republicans of holding the country to ransom. Shortly before midnight, Senate majority leader Harry Reid marked the end of the process by rejecting House calls for formal talks to reconcile their conflicting positions, arguing it was impossible to negotiate with a “gun to our heads”. “This is a very serious time in the history of our country,” Reid said. “Millions of people are going to be affected tomorrow and the Republicans are still playing games” But the impact of the shutdown could be felt outside America too, if the warring sides cannot agree a deal soon. And once they've managed that, the US faces the separate challenge of raising its debt ceiling before the middle of October. We'll be tracking the reaction to the shutdown, and explaining what it could mean for the world economy, through the day - along with other key events. Updated at 12.45pm BST