House majority Leader Eric Cantor, third from left, meets House Republican conferees, indicating that the chairs opposite him were intended for Democrats who had declined to join the discussions. Photograph: J. Scott Applewhite/AP House Republicans are planning to pass piecemeal funding bills releasing national parks and veterans services from the government shutdown as they seek party support to drag out their spending battle with Democrats toward a separate debt limit deadline on 17 October. Under growing internal pressure to soften the impact of Monday night's shutdown, GOP leaders agreed to exempt several of the more symbolic government services after they were embarrassed by a group of visiting World War II veterans who had to force their way into a Washington memorial closed by the shutdown. Such piecemeal spending authorisations, possibly including separate relief for services in the District of Columbia, would be the second time Republicans have taken steps to mitigate the more politically-sensitive consequences of their hardball strategy. Over the weekend, they also voted to protect active-duty military employees from any pay disruption. The new exemptions, expected to be voted on in the House possibly as soon as Monday evening, may also help relieve internal tension among Republican moderates anxious about the reputational damage caused by the shutdown. Speaking after a party meeting to agree the new strategy, one moderate Republican in favour of dropping demands over Obamacare from the whole budget debate, welcomed the proposal. "It's a step in the right direction," he said. Just how many Republican moderates are pressuring party leaders remains unclear, but the scale of the split may prove to be the determining factor in how long the government shutdown continues. On Monday night, New York representative Peter King led a failed revolt to prevent passage of any more Obamacare amendments. But despite rumours that he may have 25 colleagues with him, the rebellion attracted barely half a dozen votes, including some conservatives who wanted party leaders to go further. Pressure is also mounting on House Republicans from previously supportive voices in the Senate. On Tuesday morning, senator Rand Paul joined other Republican critics such as John McCain in urging a more cautious approach. "I think what we could do is pass a very short term, maybe not six weeks, but what about one week, so we could negotiate over a week," Paul told CNN. "I think a continuing bill to keep the government open while we negotiate is a good idea. I do agree that negotiating with the government closed probably to [Democrats] appears like strong-arm tactics." McCain has grown more vocal still, appearing at times actively campaign with Democrats. "We can't win this fight," he repeated on Tuesday, calling on GOP leaders to immediately pass a bill to fund the government Nevertheless, hardliners in the House continue to hold their ground, hinting at a protracted shutdown so long as they can keep their moderate wing in abeyance. Fiscal hawk Paul Ryan led a theatrical stunt on Tuesday to meet with so-called "conferees" nominated by the House who are hoping to hold talks with the Senate. The GOP heavy-hitters, including House majority leader Eric Cantor and ways and means chairman Dave Camp convened for "negotiations" across from empty chairs where Senate Democrats were meant to be sitting. Earlier on Tuesday morning, Senate Democrats had voted overwhelmingly to boycott the proposed conference, insisting they would not negotiate with a "gun to the head" over Obamacare. But, more ominously still, Ryan suggested that the best hope of forcing Democrats to the table would be to drag the shutdown out until the middle of October when it would coincide with a deadline to agree government borrowing authorisation. "We think the debt limit is the forcing mechanism," Ryan told reporters. "That's what we think will bring the two parties together." There remains plenty of support in the Republican party mainstream for this tactic of insisting on negotiations before making any further concessions. Representative Tom Mclintock of California reflected the views of many Republicans when he told the House: "This shutdown should not have happened. We should sit down and negotiate through our differences. This is the way our bicameral system has worked for over a two hundred years, this is the only way it can work." And Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell, who has been more supportive of late, compared the role of House Republicans who worked late into night this weekend to keep the government open with senate Democrats who "dragged their feet for days". Indeed, the bigger to challenge for Ryan and other hardliners in the short term remains from Democrats who may block any attempts to pass piecemeal budget authorisations and keep the stakes as high as possible. White House spokesman Jay Carney immediately dismissed the idea on Tuesday afternoon as "not serious." "If they want to open the government, they should open the government," he said. Meanwhile, President Obama continued to focus his attack on the underlying motives of Republicans, who want to reverse health insurance exchanges launched today. "I know it seems strange that one party would make keeping people uninsured the centerpiece of their agenda, but that's where it is," Obama told a press conference in the White House rose garden. "As long as I am president I will not give in to reckless demands by the Republican party to deny health insurance to the millions of Americans that cannot afford it."