Barack Obama after giving a speech on the budget showdown with Congress. Photograph: Saul Loeb/AFP/Getty The shutdown of the US federal government dragged into a second day on Wednesday amid concerns that the crisis will bleed into a hazardous confrontation with hardline Republicans in two weeks time over the country's borrowing requirement. Jack Lew, the Treasury secretary, has said the US will start running out of cash unless the debt limit, set by Congress, is raised by 17 October. However in a repeat of the current standoff over the federal budget, the conservative wing of the Republican party is threatening to exploit its leverage over raising the debt ceiling to unpick Obama's healthcare reforms. Economists warn that such a confrontation could have far more severe consequences than the current government shutdown, which has resulted in 800,000 federal employees being forced to stay at home without pay. A failure by the US to meet its debt payments could lead to a default and trigger a wider economic crisis that would be felt across the world. The brinksmanship is being led by an influential group of radical Republicans in the House of Representatives, who are using every available technique to attack the Affordable Care Act. The law broadens access to healthcare, passed both houses of Congress three years ago and survived a presidential election. Barack Obama, speaking in the Rose Garden of the White House on Tuesday, accused the cadre of "holding the economy to hostage" over their ideological opposition to the law. A key part of the legislation, known as Obamacare, came into force on Tuesday, coinciding with the start of the first shutdown in almost two decades. The shutdown has closed national parks, museums and monuments, and reduced many government departments and agencies to a threadbare staff. The White House announced the cancellation of Obama's forthcoming visits to Malaysia and Philippines because staff had not had time to prepare for it. The president is still scheduled to leave the US on Saturday, keeping to the first leg of what will now be a truncated tour, with summit meetings in Indonesia and Brunei. The shortened trip is a blow to the administration, which is seeking to build economic ties in Asia, and underscores the severity of the crisis in Washington. But the decision to cancel the last two stops of the tour also ensures Obama will return to Washington in the run-up to a probable showdown over the debt ceiling. Senior figures in both parties appear to be coalescing around the view that there is little point in resolving the stalemate over the budget without also dealing with the impending confrontation over the debt limit. "This is now all together," said the second most senior Democratic senator, Dick Durbin. Paul Ryan, the Republican house budget committee chairman, put it in more stark terms: "We think the debt limit is the forcing mechanism. That's what we think will bring the two parties together." The White House previously said it would refuse to negotiate over the debt ceiling, saying Republicans should not be allowed to use the threat of a global economic crisis to advance their narrow ideological agenda against healthcare. On Wednesday, Republicans in the House were expected to revive a motion to ease the more politically embarrassing impacts of the shutdown, in the latest of a series of tit-for-tat exchanges on Capitol Hill designed to deflect blame for the crisis and manage the public relations fallout. Republicans are claiming that their Democratic counterparts are responsible for the shutdown, highlighting their refusal to negotiate. But polls show that the public is largely holding the Republican party responsible for a closure of large portions of the government which, should it last long enough, will start to be felt far outside of Washington, as government bureaucracy slows to a halt. Already the tax-collection agency, the Internal Revenue Service, has suspended audits and most staff at Nasa have been furloughed. Some major government websites and Twitter feeds have been inactive since Tuesday. Using special procedural rules on Tuesday night, the GOP tried to fast-track a measure that would provide piecemeal relief from the shutdown, freeing up funding to pay for national parks, veterans services and the local government in Washington DC, which could run out of cash in two weeks, bringing the capital city to a standstill. Republicans failed to get the two-thirds majority required under the rules, but indicated they would resume the efforts on Wednesday, using a more conventional route that would only require a straight majority. In return, Democrats in the House were reportedly considering their own procedural measures that would force a vote on a clean spending bill – stripped of initiatives to unpick Obamacare – and reveal the depth of the rift in one the Republican side. Congressman Peter King, on the moderate wing of House Republicans, told MSNBC that increasing numbers of his colleagues were growing tired with a Tea Party contingent that were seeking to "hijack the party". He said Republican lawmakers would meet on Wednesday to try to find a way through the impasse, and suggested as many as a hundred were now weary of the strong-arm tactics advocated by the leading Tea Party senator, Ted Cruz. However in recent days King has overstated the size of potential rebellions by Republican moderates and underestimated the strength of the stranglehold held over the party's House leadership by its hardline members.