A portion of the National Mall with the US Capitol in the background is closed due the government shutdown. Photograph: Rex/Kris Tripplaar To think that some of us Americans waited painfully and patiently for the George W Bush/Dick Cheney error to end, and now this: a government shutdown because of the zealot-like righteousness of a few religiously-inspired martyrs in Congress who allege that they are champions of the US constitution. That's the biggest thing that galls me – and makes me scared that we aren't far from lawlessness and mayhem, especially when you add in the voting rights setbacks that threaten future elections, local and national. A few members of the US Congress (and one nutcase senator) jump the shark over President Barack Obama's signature healthcare reform law and we all have to sip the blood. People joke about the Panda Cam at the National Zoo in Washington going dark, but what about the Federal Trade Commission investigators who aren't hunting down Russian hackers this week, courtesy of Senator Ted Cruz and House Speaker John Boehner's shutdown? The practical mess of the shutdown is not funny, pandas and all. But what's really not funny is the perilous fight we have on our hands. Can we restore any integrity and faith in our own government? How can we, especially since Fox News has so successfully enlisted average Americans to rage against Barack Obama and the Affordable Care Act as if they were fighting the Nazis. How did this become progressives' war? We could have tolerated conservatism's debate on smaller government. We get it. Government is a beast. It needs to be checked. A social safety net can create bloat and abuses. Let's debate each other about where to draw the line. Or, in the case of the Affordable Care Act, figure out what's working and what's not and fix it, constructively, so that health care safety and costs can be attained and leveled. But to deliberately smash government, to vilify it and persecute it and kick it to the curb like one of those welfare takers Mitt Romney was never going to win over during his failed presidential run? That's another story. That's a rabid faction of Congress that can't be brought back to the fold. That's a faction of Congress that has teetered outside the bounds of rational discourse, fueled, likely, by copious amounts of booze and backslapping and safe pockets of gerrymandering that have created two Americas, one red and mostly Caucasian, the other blue and colorful, diverse. What's hard for most of us to understand is this: Barack Obama rode to the presidency in large part because of the backlash against Iraq war and the neo-con lies perpetrated by the Bush/Cheney administration. A terrorist attack on US soil had fed an unchecked frenzy for an unlawful and unfunded war, yet by 2004, when evidence was in about the lies and abuse of power by the Bush administration, many of us were weathering a sense of almost unfathomable betrayal. You would have imagined that under those circumstances, the seeds were sewn for lawless uprisings; for discontent (and worse) to have undermined our sense of allegiance to our country 'tis of thee. Grieving as some US citizens were during this time, we still found a way to use our democratic process to restore our ideals, to make change, but to do so within the context and confines of our constitutional system. For those of us who opposed the war in Iraq; who grew disgusted with the cronyism and incompetence of the Bush administration (Hurricane Katrina response; Wall Street's implosion; the bank bailout), we waited out the policymakers who we thought were steering us in the wrong direction. We amassed the votes necessary to make a change. Maybe those of us who were sickened over the Iraq war and the bleeding of money to Halliburton and the faux conservatism of the Bush/Cheney administration should have been more unruly. Now a US law rightfully enacted and justly upheld by the Supreme Court is being held hostage for renegotiation by obstructionists as if the Affordable Care Act was just an idea, a bill, and not a law. In this instance, we are sure that something has gone very wrong inside our own elected government. Some of us are very alarmed, although maybe not surprised. This is what you get in an America where congressional districts are drawn in configurations meant largely to protect Republicans. This is what you get when the Citizens United Supreme Court ruling allows unlimited mystery money to flow into political action committees to elect candidates who are unanswerable to constituents but owned by corporations. But there's a major difference between those who voted for Obama and "Obamacare" and those who have shutdown the federal government: while we licked our wounds, and watched as Supreme-Court-ordered loser Al Gore grew that beard and gut, we may have despaired, but we also figured that our way out of the mess was to work the system we have. We waited and organized and were ready to show that the country was comprised of a more diverse population; that we did not want wars of choice; that we needed to get back to the business of reinventing our economy, including the biggest drain on our fiscal well-being: sky-rocketing healthcare costs. We got change by using the system as it was intended. We waited and amassed the votes for change, which wound up being in the form of Barack Obama. Like a mirror, it is said, Obama reflects whatever anyone who's looking at him wants to see. For us, he was change. For the government shutdowners who have sprayed the stink of anarchy on us all, Obama is the illegitimate son of big government and a panderer to all the takers and all the food stamp users and all the uninsured who put him in the White House. Twice.