Senate majority leader Harry Reid and fellow Democrat Chuck Schumer. Many expect the shutdown to last for several days. Photograph: J Scott Applewhite/AP Barack Obama called congressional leaders to a meeting at the White House on Wednesday amid fears that a protracted deadlock over the US government shutdown could trigger a wider economic crisis. But there was little hope that the meeting would end the standoff, which has plunged hundreds of thousands of federal workers into financial uncertainty and caused alarm beyond the US. Some Republicans in the House of Representatives, whose opposition to President Obama's healthcare reforms is driving their party's hardline stance, have openly said that they expect the row over the federal budget to extend into a confrontation in the coming weeks over the country's borrowing requirement. Jack Lew, the treasury secretary, has said the US will run out of cash by 17 October unless the debt limit, set by Congress, is raised. Economists warn that a failure by the US to meet its debt payments would have far more severe consequences than the current government shutdown, which has been caused by the refusal of Republicans to pass a budget resolution without a deal to unpick key aspects of Obama's healthcare reforms. The shutdown has closed national parks, museums and monuments, and reduced many government departments and agencies to a threadbare staff. The White House announced the cancellation of Obama's visits to Malaysia and Philippines because staff had not had time to prepare. On Wednesday, House Republicans revived their attempts to ease the more politically embarrassing impacts of the shutdown, in the latest of a series of tit-for-tat exchanges on Capitol Hill designed to deflect blame for the crisis and manage the fallout. In response, Democrats in the House were considering their own procedural measures that would force a vote on a "clean" spending bill – stripped of initiatives to unpick Obamacare – and reveal the depth of the rift on the Republican side. Jay Carney, the White House spokesman, said the mini-bills in the House to fund parks, veterans services and the District of Columbia were unacceptable. "That is not how this works," Carney says. "It's a gimmick … and it's unserious. If they think those services should be open, vote to open the government." Carney said the president "will not offer concessions to Republicans in exchange for not tanking the economy" at the Wednesday meeting, which he said would address the narrow, immediate goal of reopening the government. "Just because you can't get you want through the American government process doesn't mean you should subvert that process," Carney said. The White House has maintained it will refuse to negotiate over the debt ceiling, arguing that Republicans should not be allowed to use the threat of a global economic crisis to advance their ideological agenda against healthcare. Senior figures in both parties appear to be resigned to a drawn-out process that would bleed into a confrontation over the debt limit. "This is now all together," said the second most senior Democratic senator, Dick Durbin. Paul Ryan, the Republican house budget committee chairman, said on Tuesday: "We think the debt limit is the forcing mechanism. That's what we think will bring the two parties together." The brinksmanship is being led by an influential group of radical Republicans in the House of Representatives, who are using every available technique to attack the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare. The law, which broadens access to healthcare, passed both houses of Congress three years ago, survived a presidential election and held off a supreme court challenge. On Tuesday, Obama accused the cadre of "holding the economy hostage". Congressman Peter King, a moderate Republican, told MSNBC on Wednesday that increasing numbers of his colleagues were growing tired with a Tea Party contingent that were seeking to "hijack the party". The Obama administration's senior national security figures pressed home the security implications of the shutdown on Wednesday. The army chief of staff, General Ray Odierno, told Reuters that it "impacts significantly day-to-day operations", forcing the military to cut training, travel and focus on tasks that were essential to current operations. "The longer it goes on, the worse it gets. Every day that goes by, we are losing manpower, we are losing capability, so in my mind it is important we get this resolved," he said. James Clapper, the director of national intelligence, said the shutdown threatened the security of the United States, with about 70% of his staff furloughed. "The damage will be insidious," he told the Senate judiciary committee. "Each day that goes by, the jeopardy increases." He said intelligence agencies were only legally permitted to keep staff who were "necessary to protect against imminent threat against life or property", leading to thousands of workers being sent home. "I've never seen anything like this. In my view I think this, on top of the sequestration cuts, seriously damages the safety and security of the nation," Clapper said.