6.44pm ET We're going to wrap up our live blog coverage for the day. Here's a summary of where things stand: • Congress showed no signs of headway on a deal to re-open the government. Congressional leaders met with the president Wednesday afternoon to try to agree on a path forward. • President Obama warned that violating the debt ceiling would be dire and that as far as political brinksmanship goes, "this time it's different" and the markets should be "concerned."  • Obama said he was "exasperated" by Republican tactics. • Republicans were said to be seeking to fold in the current spending bill negotiation to a bigger-picture budget deal, the National Review's Robert Costa reported. Given the inability for Congress to sign off on a relatively straightforward spending measure, aiming for a grand bargain on the budget seemed ambitious. • Republicans accused majority leader Harry Reid of callousness for a reply Reid made to a question about funding research for children with cancer. "Why would we want to do that?" Reid said. The interpretation of this line in context seemed to hew exactly to party affiliation. • Goldman Sachs CEO Lloyd Blankfein urged lawmakers to raise the debt ceiling, as did Bank of America CEO Brian Moynihan. • Conservative hero Grover Norquist said Senator Ted Cruz "pushed House Republicans into traffic and wandered away." • Director of national intelligence James Clapper said 70 percent of intelligence staff had been furloughed. Senator Ted Cruz called that "deeply troubling." • The army chief of staff warned the shutdown "impacts significantly day-to-day operations" of the military. • A whip count showed the House with enough votes to pass a spending bill to reopen the government, but House speaker Boehner made no move to bring the bill to the floor, fearing a revolt from the extreme wing of his caucus. • Government agencies and departments remained closed, with hundreds of thousands of federal workers on furlough. Here's our comprehensive list of closures.