11.49am ET Here's a summary of where things stand: • In a speech at a construction firm President Obama bore down on Republicans, calling on the House to hold a vote on the spending bill and accusing speaker John Boehner of not doing so because he "doesn't want to anger the extremists in his party." • The president took a hard line. The Democratic position since before the shutdown has been that the House must vote on a "clean" spending resolution, without any health care provision. The demand is unchanged this morning: "Congress has to pass a budget that funds our government with no partisan strings attached," Obama said. • Obama went directly after the Tea Party caucus, calling them "extremists" who were demanding a "ransom just for doing their jobs." He quoted the most inflammatory statement to come out of the Tea Party during the shutdown: "We're not going to be disrespected, We have to get something out of this. And I don't know what that even is." • Obama said Republicans were disastrously fixated on Obamacare. "This whole thing is about one thing: The Republican obsession with dismantling the Affordable Care Act," he said. "...but the ACA is still open for business. So they're not even accomplishing what they said they want to accomplish."  • Call a vote, Obama said: "My simple message today is, call a vote. Call a vote! Put it on the floor, and let every member of Congress make up their own minds. That way the American people will be clear about who's responsible for the shutdown." • A lot of people are showing interest in Obamacare, Obama said, including more than 6m visitors to the web site on Tuesday, nearly 200,000 people who phoned the call center and nearly 11,000 Kentuckians "who applied for new insurance plans in the first two days." • Obama said "an economic shutdown that results from a default would be dramatically worse" than a government shutdown. "There will be no negotiations over this," he said. • The Treasury department released a study warning that "a default would be unprecedented and has the potential to be catastrophic." • Republicans are said to be seeking a big deal as a way out of the current budget impasse, one that would wind up the current stopgap spending bill, the debt ceiling, and for good measure tax policy and nondiscretionary spending. • Americans blame Republicans in Congress for the shutdown 44-35 over President Obama and the Democrats, according to a new poll from CBS News, taken after the shutdown began Tuesday Updated at 11.59am ET