7.51am BST An electronic stock board in Tokyo, where shares hit a one-month low. Photograph: Koji Sasahara/AP Good morning, and welcome our rolling coverage of the financial markets, the eurozone, the world economy and the business world. The US government shutdown continues to cast a shadow over the global economy, as we enter a fourth day of deadlock in Washington DC. Japan's Nikkei index just hit a one-month low, and we're expecting shares to fall (although not dramatically) in Europe too.  It comes as President Obama cancels his scheduled trip to Asia, and Treasury Secretary Jack Lew issues another warning over the looming debt ceiling (more on that shortly). Concern is growing that the shutdown will drag on, hurting the global economy and even leading to the US technically defaulting on its debts if it doesn't hike its debt limit by the October 17 deadline. With the scheduled US jobs data cancelled, investors have little to calm their mounting anxiety that the shutdown could turn into something pretty damn serious. In Asia, Japan's Nikkei posted a fall of 0.94%, down 132 points to 14024. That means it has lost 5% this week, the biggest weekly fall since August. As Kit Juckes of Société Générale reminds us, investors started the week believing the US shutdown wasn't a problem: The lack of concern markets showed at the start of the week as they watched Washington gridlock, is being replaced by growing US pessimism— kit juckes (@kitjuckes) October 4, 2013 What else is afoot? Well, with no US jobs data to entertain me I'll be watching for progress in the German coalition talks , which begin today. We'll also have an eye on Greece, of course. And in the City, we'll be reporting on a profits warning from Carpetright (the CEO's departing too), and the news that Barclays has reported a 95% take-up for its rights issue. 95pct uptake for Barclays Â£6bn rights issue, bank confirms. Remainder of shares to be placed— Jill Treanor (@jilltreanor) October 4, 2013 Plus any other big developments through the day....