10.34am ET Good morning and welcome to our live blog coverage of day four of the partial government shutdown. In a frozen landscape, the most intriguing zone of activity – of what we can see – is Republicans chasing a big budget deal instead of a simple spending bill that would reopen government. The big deal could reportedly include an agreement to raise the debt ceiling or even modify the tax code. House speaker John Boehner is meeting this morning with his caucus in an attempt to outline such a deal. However, there are signs that it will not be easy to get the Republicans in the House to agree on anything a catchall deal. Another catch: the Democratic Senate leadership has said they won’t take up any larger budget questions until the House passes a spending bill that doesn't mention Obamacare. The president has vowed not to horse-trade around the debt ceiling. "There will be no negotiations over this," Obama said Thursday. The president announced late Thursday that due to the shutdown he has canceled a trip to the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum that was to begin Sunday. Earlier in the week the White House had announced the trip would merely be shortened. Secretary of State John Kerry will attend in Obama's stead. Over the last two days the House has passed bills to fund chunks of government including veterans' services, national parks and museums, health research, the payroll of the National Guard and military reserve members and the municipality of the District of Columbia. Senate Democrats reject the bills out of hand, insisting on reopening all of government. Rep. Blackburn says @dailyrundown House Rs willing to re-open gov on "bit-by-bit basis." So they'll free a few hostages, but continue siege?— David Axelrod (@davidaxelrod) October 4, 2013 The stopgap spending bill the president wants the House to pass – the one passed by the Senate on 27 September – would keep the government running through 15 November, one month less than a bill passed earlier in the House. Friendly reminder: The GOP's jihad is against a bill that funds the govt for just SIX WEEKS.— Faiz (@fshakir) October 4, 2013 Furloughed federal employees and union leaders have planned a rally near the Capitol today to "Stop the Government Lockout." Updated at 10.42am ET