AT midnight on 30 September the US government officially shut for the first time in more than 17 years, after the Senate and the House of the Representatives failed to pass a federal spending bill to keep the government running. Photograph: Mike Segar/Photograph: Mike Segar/REUTERS The US government has been shutting its non-essential services because US politicians on Capitol Hill haven't managed to agree new budget for the new US financial year (which started on 1 October). As hundreds of thousands of workers, from Pentagon employees to rangers in national parks, are told to take an unpaid holiday – and even the Grand Canyon is closed – here are the best news stories, multimedia, teaching resources and websites to explore and expand upon the issues in the politics, economics and citizenship classroom – and beyond. From the Guardian US shutdown: a guide for non-Americans The Q&A explains why the American government has begun shutting its non-essential services – and what that actually means. How will the US government shutdown affect the global economy? – video What are the ramifications of the US government shutdown? The Guardian's economics editor Larry Elliot provides a really clear explanation in this video. US shutdown – in pictures Images to share with your students of the countdown to the shutdown as the US government officially shuts for the first time in more than 17 years, after the Senate and the House of the Representatives failed to pass a federal spending bill to keep the government running. A short history of US shutdowns. This is the first shutdown of the 21st century, but it happened 18 times between 1976 and 1996 US shutdown hits Obama's climate agenda This article helps explain some realities of the shutdown: around 94% of the 16,205 employees at the Environmental Protection Agency have been sent home on an unpaid 'holiday' as part of the US shutdown – which will disrupt the employees' lives and finances, prevent monitoring of air and water quality and also put back President Obama's climate change agenda. US shutdown: what does it mean for markets and the global economy? This Q&A simply explains how the dollar is down and a prolonged crisis could damage consumer spending, confidence and China's attitude to US debt. On the Guardian Teacher Network US crisis as government shutdown is triggered A news story on the US shutdown plus some triggers for debate are included in this resource from schools news service The Day. With the Grand Canyon closed and the Pentagon on a skeleton staff just how dangerous is this paralysis of the world's richest country? US political system explainer This resource was written for the US presidential elections of 2012 and explains a lot of need to know basics of US politics for students interested in the shutdown story, also see this accompanying PowerPoint of images. US civil rights workshop The shutdown has shed a light on vulnerabilities in the US system which could impact on people's civil rights, especially as the row over Obamacare is so central. This resource from the National Archives explores some historical events in US civil rights history through original documents. Summary of Obama's campaign issues For an insight into what gets up tea party activists' noses and prevents consensus from being reached, check out Barack Obama's original campaigning issues for the last election. Tips for holding a debate Some great ideas on how to engage your class in a debate, maybe someone could pass this on to certain US politicians whose inability to come to productive agreement has triggered this shutdown. The best of the web Why has the US government shutdown Nice work Leah from Newsround for explaining the situation in a way that a primary school students can grasp. Obama on Twitter Follow Barack Obama on Twitter for some great insights into this and other issues. You never know, your class might even get a reply if you send a tweet to the US President. How US shutdown is hurting individual states Fascinating post on Huffington Post with a state-by-state guide on how the shutdown is affecting people and projects in the US. What the government shutdown means for schools The High School Soup blog explains how this stalemate situation affects schools and school students. Six Qs about the budget standoff Interesting blog on the New York Time's Learning Network for schools, including questions and comments from school students. This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. Looking for your next role? Take a look at Guardian jobs for schools for thousands of the latest teaching, leadership and support jobs.