With the government shutdown still unresolved, Senate majority leader Harry Reid leaves the chamber on Saturday Photograph: J Scott Applewhite/AP The Treasury secretary, Jack Lew, on Sunday accused Congress of "playing with fire" as the White House and Republicans remained entrenched over the government shutdown and the extension of the debt ceiling. Appearing on CNN's State of the Union during a tour of the Sunday talk shows, Lew said there was no option that would prevent the government from defaulting on its bills should lawmakers refuse to vote to raise the debt ceiling before the 17 October deadline. Senior Republicans, however, lined up to insist in response that they would not compromise in their attempt to dismantle or defund Obamacare, the president's signature healthcare reform. "There is no option that prevents us from being in default if we don't have enough cash to pay our bills," Lew said. Asked if President Barack Obama could bypass Congress and use other measures to raise the debt ceiling and avoid defaulting, Lew said the only available solution was through Congress. "The White House has spoken quite clearly to this," Lew said. "The president does not have the authority to take action in that kind of a way. The president consulted with his lawyers, and that's the conclusion that he's reached." The government will reach its borrowing limit on 17 October, Lew said. "I'm telling you that on the 17th, we run out of our ability to borrow, and Congress is playing with fire." Lew repeatedly said that "50 to 100" members of Congress" stood in the way of a resolution to the crisis which has now shut down the federal government for five days. Such politicians, he said, referring to right-wing Republicans, had "changed the rules of the game". Lew was scheduled to appear on five Sunday news shows as the Obama administration sought to force Congress to take action. Texas senator Ted Cruz, one of the most outspoken voices against Obamacare, was among the Republicans who appeared to answer him. Cruz told CNN that Republicans should seek three things in exchange for passing a debt ceiling deal. "We should look for some significant structural plan to reduce government spending," he said. "Number two, we should avoid new taxes. And number three we should look for ways to mitigate the harms from Obamacare." Recent polls have shown that more people blame Republicans than blame Obama for the shutdown. In a signal of the toxicity of the shutdown as a political issue, the Republican candidate for the governorship of Virginia, Ken Cuccinelli, reportedly went to great lengths to avoid being seen with Cruz when they both spoke at a gala in Richmond, Virginia, on Saturday night. Cruz praised Cuccinelli as "principled and fearless" during his speech at Richmond convention centre. Cuccinelli did not mention Cruz during his remarks and avoided being photographed with the Tea Party favourite. Asked by CNN's Candy Crowley if he thought he had "damaged the Republican party brand" – in light of reports of division over Cruz's actions, which have included a 21-hour Senate speech in a fruitless attempt to stop the passage of a budget bill without any provisions to defund Obamacare, Cruz said: "Not remotely." The House speaker, John Boehner, has been criticised by some as being held hostage by a relatively small group of Tea Party-backed Republican members of Congress. Some have speculated that there are enough votes in Congress between Democrats and moderate Republicans to pass a "clean bill" – one without stipulations on dismantling Obamacare – if Boehner would bring it to the floor. Lew repeated this idea on CNN and on NBC's Meet the Press. On Sunday, however, Boehner attempted to shift the blame, insisting there were not enough votes in the House. Speaking on ABC's This Week, he said: "There are not votes in the House to pass a clean CR." Boehner added that the House would not pass a bill raising the debt ceiling without a provision related to Obamacare. "We are not going to pass a clean debt limit [bill]," Boehner said. "The votes are not in the House … We are not going down that path." The Kentucky senator Rand Paul, appearing on Meet the Press, completed the Republicans' united front. "We've been putting out clean CRs all week," he said, referring to the piecemeal legislation House Republicans have put forward to fund individual strands of government, which on Saturday included a bill to assure furloughed federal employees of the reimbursement of lost pay. Paul said no one was "winning" from the shutdown and said House members had been "wanting to fund government" – apart from Obamacare. Asked why Republicans in the Congress had shut down the government over a bill that had passed both Houses, been signed into law by the president and then been upheld by the supreme court, Paul said it was "Congress's job to oversee spending". "It's not their obligation once something is law to never change it," he said. "It's a silly argument for Democrats to say: 'Oh the law's been passed, we can never change it.'"