7.55am BST US Treasury Secretary Jack Lew appearing on "Meet the Press", where he warned Congress was 'playing with fire'. Photograph: HANDOUT/REUTERS Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the financial markets, the world economy, the eurozone and the business world. It's the seventh day of the US government shutdown, and the lack of progress in Washington continues to cast a shadow over the financial world. Shares have slipped in Asia overnight; in Japan, the Nikkei shed another 1.2%. European markets are expected to fall again. America seems no closer to a solution to the deadlock, nearly a week after the Federal government began shutting services and sending workers home. It is, though, closer to its debt ceiling -- the US is still on track to hit its maximum borrowing limit of $16.7bn on 17 October. Yesterday, Treasury secretary Jack Lew warned that America would default if the ceiling isn't raised. Congress, he said, was "playing with fire". Lew said: I'm telling you that on the 17th, we run out of the ability to borrow, and Congress is playing with fire. But the Republican-controlled House of Representatives hasn't blinked -- continuing to demand concessions from President Obama.  House speaker John Boehner was defiant last night, saying his side would "stand and fight" for concessions on issues like healthcare reforms. Boehner told ABC television: You’ve never seen a more dedicated group of people who are thoroughly concerned about the future of our country. The nation’s credit is at risk because of the administration’s refusal to sit down and have a conversation. So the deadlock continues, with investors pondering whether this impasse really could turn into a catastrophic debt default. Stan Shamu of IG explains that traders are more nervous than late last week: While Friday’s modest gains in US equities were driven by a glimmer of hope that leaders are getting closer, this seems to have waned over the weekend. House speaker John Boehner was quoted as saying he wouldn’t pass a bill to increase the US debt ceiling without addressing longer-term spending and budget challenges. This has really rattled markets and is likely to result in further near-term weakness for global equities.  #FTSE100 called to open -20 as US deadlock continues to weigh— Paul Kavanagh (@KavanaghKillik) October 7, 2013 "@LondonCityAir: Due to fog this morning......" yup, sums up markets with no US progress (or data).— kit juckes (@kitjuckes) October 7, 2013 Not much on the economic calendar today, although we do get the latest eurozone reading of investor confidence at 9.30am BST. In the UK, the row over the Royal Mail privatisation continues, with critics warning that it's being sold off too cheaply. While in Greece, there were reports on Saturday that Athens is considering swapping some bailout loans for new 50-year bonds, as part of a third aid package. Reuters had the story: Greece mulls swapping bailout loans with 50-year bond issue: source I'll be tracking all the action through the day....