Barack Obama will follow up his state of the union address by participating in a Google hangout – a group video chat – on Thursday afternoon. He will take questions from Americans via the White House YouTube channel about the issues he discussed in his speech. Thousands of people have already submitted questions and voted on their favorites. In the lead-up to this sort of "people's state of the union", which starts at 4.50pm, we've asked our reporters to consider the top (most voted on) questions in three categories – climate change, the economy and immigration – and to provide some insight into how the president may (or may not) respond. Navigate this primer Questions about the environment and climate change Questions about immigration reform Questions about jobs and the economy Climate change and the environment – Suzanne Goldenberg What are your plans for getting GMOs labelled? Do you believe it is us Americans' right to know what is in our food? – atmoslithos What's Obama's record on this so far? Silence – as president anyway. Back in 2007, in his early days as candidate for the Democratic nomination, Obama did once venture that people had a right to know what they were eating. But he has not touched the issue in the White House. Campaign groups such as Food and Water Watch say the Obama Administration has been swifter to process new GM food applications than the Bush Administration. How likely is Obama to solve this issue during his second term? Obama has given no indication at all he wants to weigh into the issue of labelling GM foods – no matter his wife Michelle's interest in food and healthy eating. But events may force the issue. An entirely new type of GM food – engineered salmon – is in the final stages of review by the FDA, and is expected to win approval later this year. Meanwhile, several states have taken up bills to require labelling of GM foods. Any facts or stats you should be aware of as Obama answers your question? This is a big fight. Polls cited by campaign groups say more than 90% of Americans support labelling of GM foods. But the food industry will fight back hard. Industry spent more than $45m last year to defeat California's ballot initiative to require labels on GM foods. How likely is Obama to even approach this question during the hangout? Obama probably figures he has enough on his plate. I would be surprised if he takes up this question. Sorry. Mr. President, Can you describe what actions on climate change you would ideally like to take during your second term, assuming that they could pass Congress? – mrmike3292 What's Obama's record on this so far? Mixed, but getting better. Obama's biggest achievement was bringing in new rules doubling fuel efficiency standards to 54.5 mpg by 2025. But he did not invest his political capital or use all of his executive authority to push for stronger climate measures. How likely is Obama to solve this issue during his second term? Obama can't solve climate change in the next four years. But he can make a strong start if he follows through on some of the measures outlined in the State of the Union. Directing the Environmental Protection Agency to limit emissions from existing coal-fired power plants and bringing in new energy-saving measures for buildings would go a long way. Any facts or stats you should be aware of as Obama answers your question? Don't fall for the hype about doubling wind and solar power. The US had its best year by far for new wind and solar installations last year. Industry and campaign groups say Obama's promise in the state of the union address to double wind and solar power is not ambitious enough. How likely is Obama to even approach this question during the hangout? Very. Obama has made a point of talking about climate change since his re-election. He needs to get the public on his side if he is going to be able to do what he has pledged to do. So expect him to keep on talking about how climate change is a danger now, not in the future, bringing blistering drought and monster storms. He may also continue to reaffirm the science behind climate change. Immigration – Ed Pilkington Mr Obama, What are you plans for keeping talented foreign individuals in USA after they get their master/PhD? How likely is Obama to solve this issue during his second term? Obama has said he wants to fix the problem of America's outdated approach to legal immigration, which is causing major headaches for Silicon Valley and other big US businesses because they cannot attract the skilled workers they need to remain ahead of the global tech game. He is proposing to "staple" a green card to the degrees or PhDs achieved by foreign students in the core "STEM" subjects of science, technology, engineering and maths. But he'll only get this proposal through if Congress backs his broader, comprehensive package of reforms including the crucial pathway to citizenship for the 11 million undocumented immigrants in this country. Any facts or stats you should be aware of as Obama answers the question? Every year more than 15,000 foreign-born STEM graduates from US universities are forced to leave the country because they can't get visas. Many of them go on to found startups in other countries, thus hurting US global competitiveness. Australia, a country with an economy that is 14 times smaller than the US, grants almost as many green cards. How likely is Obama to even approach this question during the hangout? Pretty likely. This is a pet subject of the president's. He wants America to remain the cutting edge powerhouse of entrepreneurship that it has long been – but that's impossible without a major overhaul of the legal green card system. You talk about reforming immigration, why are we talking about rewarding people who break the law? Perhaps we should give every murderer an all-inclusive 7-night stay in Hawaii? How likely is Obama to solve this issue during his second term? The anonymous poster behind this comment may have a colorful way of expressing him – or her – self, but the question itself goes to the heart of the political challenge now facing the president. His main problem in trying to persuade Congress to back his package of reforms is to convince skeptical Republicans that a pathway to citizenship for the 11 million undocumented immigrants already in the country is a necessary modernization and not a reward for law breakers. Success is not a foregone conclusion – the last time Congress was asked to pass a similar reform bill, in 2007, the Republicans in the Senate killed it for just that reason. Any facts or stats you should be aware of as Obama answers your question? There is one statistic that sums up in a nutshell why Obama has a better chance in 2013 of getting this deal done than George Bush had in 2007: Obama won the 2012 presidential election in no small measure because Latinos swung to him in droves, backing him by 71% to Mitt Romney's 27%. Republican leaders know they have to change their tone if the same disaster is not to befall them in 2016. How likely is Obama to even approach this question during the hangout? Not very likely. Not least because Obama considers Hawaii his home. Jobs and the economy – Heidi Moore Why is it reported that the economy is doing great when so many Americans are still out of work and companies still keep shutting down or moving else where? What's Obama's record on this so far? This is a great question. If you've read any stories that say the economy is doing great, put them down immediately. The economy is recovering, but it is doing so sluggishly, according to many economists, and very unevenly. Some parts of it are rebounding well: housing, for instance, is coming back fast as new houses are being built and old houses are worth more money; manufacturing also seems to be picking up. Unfortunately, the jobs picture does not yet reflect that: even though it looks like we're adding jobs each month, the ratio of people who are employed has stayed roughly the same since 2010, at around 58.6% That's the lowest it has been since 1983, which was a time of another major recession. Until now we have had very few federal policies – and no large ones – devoted to reducing unemployment directly. In his state of the union, however, President Obama announced several initiatives designed in part to increase employment, including projects on infrastructure, manufacturing and renewable energy. How likely is Obama to solve this issue during his second term? It is not entirely plausible to pin this on the president alone, since private companies and Congress play a role as well, and reducing unemployment is one of the mandated purposes of the Federal Reserve. In addition, unemployment is not a problem that can be "solved", per se, but it can certainly be reduced. Right now, we consider "full employment" to be an unemployment rate of around 6%. Currently, we are adding about 181,000 jobs a month, and the unemployment rate is around 7.9%. How long it will take to reduce that rate is a matter of speculation. Some economic estimates suggest that we could reach an unemployment rate of 6.5% by 2015. The Hamilton Project predicts that, if we add a relatively brisk 208,000 jobs a month, it will take us about nine years to get to full employment. Moody's economist Mark Zandi, who is more optimistic, believes we could get to 6% unemployment – that is, full employment – by the middle of 2016, just as Obama is leaving office. Of course, the biggest mistake is to believe that the future will be just like the past. If something happens to help the economy really improve – for instance, if manufacturing, energy or infrastructure suddenly start booming – jobs could come back much faster. The truth is, it is hard to know. The only thing that is clear is that the unemployment crisis presents the president with an uphill battle for his next four years. Any facts or stats we should be aware of as Obama answers this question? The biggest statistic to keep in mind is the stubborn number of people who have suffered long-term unemployment and been out of the workforce for 27 weeks or more. There were 4.7 million of those people in January. It was the lowest since 2009, which is good, but those long-term unemployed account for a big part of total unemployment: 38%. When Obama talks about jobs, he is also very likely to talk about the minimum wage. While many people will talk about the impact of minimum wage on full-time workers, that really only covers a small part of the population – about 3.8 million people or 5.2% of hourly workers. The number that is more important is part-time workers, of which there are roughly 18 million, and who are much more likely to end up working for minimum wage. How likely is Obama to even approach this question during the hangout? Obama is extremely likely to talk about the economy and jobs; they were both major issues in his state of the union address this week, and jobs, particularly, affect at least 12 million unemployed people and another 8 million who work part-time because they can't find full-time jobs. I know your Bridge to Work program helps those currently eligible for unemployment benefits find work. Would you consider incentives for companies to hire those who have been unable to find work and who do not currently receive unemployment benefits? trilbykat What's Obama's record on this so far? Obama introduced the Bridge to Work program in 2011. It was meant to let businesses hire people who have been out of work for a long time as interns, essentially: they would work, as a kind of audition, between two weeks and eight weeks without getting paid. The program was designed to help people who have been unemployed for over 27 weeks – there are currently 4.7 million people fitting that description, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Unfortunately, the idea did not catch on: some branches of the AFL-CIO opposed the program as potential exploitation, and by July 2012, zero states had applied to be part of the Bridge to Work program. Many states objected to strict guidelines from the Department of Labor that would have to show that the people hired for free actually went on to get jobs. Wage subsidies, which encourage employers to hire more people, are popular in countries like Germany and on a much smaller level in the United States. They are in place in some states and cities, including Dallas where the government will pay up to 75% of a worker's wages for 6 months. Connecticut adopted them last year, offering subsidies for jobs taken by people who were unemployed, living in areas of high unemployment, and with a family income below $55,875. How likely is Obama to solve this issue during his second term? As the budget becomes a major issue this year, there are chances for the president to push these issues, but he's given no indication that he really wants to. Many states already have wage subsidies and he may be reluctant to try forcing the rest to follow suit, particularly since he is battling many states on Obamacare. The president, who has to pick his spots politically, seems more enthused about bigger job-boosting programs like rebuilding the nation's infrastructure, building out manufacturing, and growing clean energy. Of course, to do that, the president will need the help of Corporate America, and they are likely to lobby for concessions in return – including tax incentives, and, just maybe, wage subsidies. It is a long shot, however. Any facts or stats you should be aware of as Obama answers your question? There are 4.7 million unemployed long-term in the United States. The president will likely need to talk about near-term ideas to help them. How likely is Obama to even approach this question during the hangout? As the Magic Eight Ball might say, "outlook hazy". Wage subsidies have not been mentioned in some time in political circles, and they are overshadowed by immigration, gun control, and other economic issues. Mr. President, Are you aware of the problems with the US patent system and how it stifles innovation (especially software patents)? What's Obama's record on this so far? In 2011, President Obama tackled part of the dissatisfaction with the patent system by signing the America Invents Act. It was designed to lower application fees and speed up patent application processing, which, in turn, would spur the creation of new companies and new jobs. The White House has acknowledged the importance of industries focused on intellectual property – including biotechnology and software – and often cites a Commerce Department report showing that industries that depend on intellectual property add $5tn to gross domestic product and offer jobs that pay 42% higher wages than other industries. That Act however, solves very little of the problem with the patent system. One of the issues that frustrates inventors and entrepreneurs are nuisance suits by others who claim patent infringement. Another issue, mentioned by Judge Richard Posner, is that there are too many patents for silly things. (Warning: Judge Posner is not convinced that many industries need patents, because they make it easy to invent things. Software would presumably fall into this category.) Posner also talked about other problems: many patent cases require judges and juries to weigh in, and there are precious few of those who can pass judgement on complicated scientific or programming matters. How likely is Obama to solve this issue during his second term? Getting patent reform passed the first time around cost Obama years in Congressional battles. The administration is unlikely to want to tackle this one again. How likely is Obama to even approach this question during the hangout? He may mention it – as part of his initiatives to boost research and development – but he is unlikely to say anything particularly new about it.