A week after the glitch-filled launch of insurance exchanges created by Barack Obama's new healthcare law, federal officials claim wait times have been cut in half and more people are successfully enrolling after days of intense work on the beleaguered healthcare.gov website. Officials have identified a failure of a major software component on the site as the cause of the crashes that crippled the system and stopped people enrolling last week. The bottleneck is in the part of the website aimed at letting people create user accounts at the start of the sign-up process. Some state-run sites that allow browsing without creating accounts report fewer problems. However, officials say the main problems are driven by too many people coming to the site. More than 8 million people have logged on to healthcare.gov, the federally-run exchange that serves 36 states. Authorities have so far refused to provide figures on how many people have managed to successfully sign up. Some of the 14 sites run by states and the District of Columbia, however, report that thousands of residents are successfully enrolling and shopping around for insurance on their sites. Kentucky, Nevada, Washington and New York are some of the most successful state-run sites in terms of numbers of people reportedly enrolling. The latest figures provided by Health and Human Services Department reported a 50% reduction in wait times since Friday, following maintenance work over the weekend. Improvements included changes to the software to allow higher volumes, hardware changes and an increase in server capacity. A statement issued on Monday by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services stressed that the work was still taking place. "The work done to increase access to healthcare.gov, in light of the overwhelming demand, is beginning to show results. Call center wait times are seconds, not minutes, and people have been enrolling over the phone 24/7. "Our work to expand the site’s capacity has led to more people successfully applying for and enrolling in affordable health coverage online, with wait times being shortened by approximately 50% since Friday." It said the work will continue until "the doors to healthcare.gov are wide open" and millions of Americans gain affordable coverage. Todd Park, President Obama's top technology adviser, said on Monday that the failure in the sign-up system occurred because of the high volumes of traffic. "At lower volumes, it would work fine," he told the New York Times. However, there has been intense criticism of the website design, with some information technology experts suggesting it appears to be built on flawed software. The account creation process feeds users into a questionnaire required to verify their identify. This requires other data to be pulled in, which overloads the system when there are high volumes of users, according to a spokesman for the New York state department of health. Since the launch of the New York site, state officials reported almost 65,500 people who they say have "visited and actively shopped". Kentucky reported that 10,000 people had completed applications and 5,000 individuals or families enrolled. The Nevada system, which, like Kentucky, allows people to browse without setting up an account, reported 77,000 unique visitors as of Wednesday night, and nearly 19,000 user accounts were created. Kevin Walsh of Xerox, the private contractor that helped build the Nevada exchange, told the Guardian they planned the system to be as user-friendly as possible. He said: "They can browse anonymously to get an idea of what the programs are and if they want to buy one they can sign up." He said that the majority of people visiting the site want to browse. However, he said that visiting a call centre in Nevada on 1 October, the first day of the exchange, was an emotional experience. "It was pretty emotional. The people that were calling in the first day had pent-up demand. They were saying: 'Can I get insurance today? Can I see a doctor today?’ We had to tell them that they would have to wait until January 1, but I've had a lot of people who were thankful to buy insurance." Jon Kingsdale, a consultant for several exchanges, and who helped set up a similar marketplace in Massachusetts in 2005, said that users had plenty of time to register and enroll. "The bulk of the enrolment will not happen till November or December. Most people will not sign up now to pay for insurance that won't start till January.” He said the level of interest was "really surprising" and that the administration had passed a major hurdle. "The first barrier to enrolment is awareness. It's critically important, and that has been very, very successful". Enrolment for 2014 health benefits runs until 31 March and coverage chosen by 15 December takes effect on 1 January. The Affordable Care Act seeks to provide health coverage for some of the 48 million Americans who are currently uninsured. The White House is aiming to enrol about 7 million people into the health exchanges this year.