3.37pm ET Here's a summary of the president's speech: • Obama did not budge from his position that Congress must reopen government and raise the debt ceiling before the administration enters budget negotiations. • Obama said he was "nervous" about a default. He said it would be catastrophic. He said it alarms him to read that some legislators think default would be OK. "At some point [Treasury] emergency powers run out, and the clock is ticking," he said. • The president indicated that he would accept a shorter-term raising of the debt ceiling, that would last as long as it takes for the current round of negotiations to play out. • Obama acknowledged that voting to raise the debt ceiling would be difficult for Republican House members. As recompense he offered a willingness to accept Republican riders to whatever deal might end the current impasse. "They can attach some process to that that gives them some certainty that in fact things they're concerned about will be topics for negotiation," he said. • Obama said he was taking a stand in the name of history, so his successors wouldn't have to deal with political fights over raising the debt ceiling.  • The president apologized "to the American people" for repeated budget crises unfolding "every three months." Obama called on the House to hold a vote on funding government. • The president dismissed House speaker John Boehner's latest idea for breaking ice in the budget talks with a "supercommittee." He said the regular budget committees process "has worked reasonably well for the last 50 years." • Obama said "extreme parts of the Republican party" are "forcing John Boehner to issue threats about our economy." • The president insisted on his own willingness to "talk about anything" with Republicans – once they open the government and cover the debt. • The president once again diagnosed an unhealthy Republican fixation on Obamacare: "The way we got to this point was one thing and one thing only: Republican obsession with dismantling the Affordable Care Act and denying health care to millions of people." • Obama said he always tells Boehner that the speaker should've agreed to a budget deal the president offered him in 2011. • Obama said he wouldn't pass the House bills to fund slivers of government because that would leave necessary but under-publicized programs unfunded. • The president said Washington's troubles are hurting US credibility abroad. A Pacific free-trade deal could have been advanced if he hadn't had to cancel his trip there this week, he said. • Obama asserted that the capture of Abu Anas al-Libi in Libya Sunday was legal and said the US has evidence of al-Libi conspiring to kill Americans.  Updated at 3.43pm ET