8.59am BST Clare Horton writes Good morning and welcome to the daily live blog from the Guardian Healthcare Professionals Network. Throughout the day, we'll be bringing you news, comment and analysis from around the web. The lawyer who uncovered the Mid Staffordshire care scandal has called for wards and units of hospitals which have too few nurses and doctors to look after patients safely to be shut down. In an interview with the Guardian, Robert Francis QC said wards should be closed until hospital bosses ensured they had enough experienced staff, with patients being sent elsewhere in the meantime. Ahead of the Department of Health's final response to Francis's report, due next month, he tells Denis Campbell: A lot of progress has been made and I'm not disappointed that it's taking some time, because rushed solutions are usually superficial. What we need here is something that causes permanent and positive change. In other news, Guardian political editor Patrick Wintour reports that Andy Burnham, the former Labour health secretary, has been given a boost in his public fight with his successor Jeremy Hunt over claims he covered up NHS failings before the last election. Elsewhere, the BBC reports on a call by Healthwatch England for NHS and care services patients to become more demanding and fight for their rights. The watchdog body is urging the public to become "savvy consumers" rather than "grateful patients". Health ministers have said abortion on the grounds of gender alone is “unacceptable and illegal” in defiance of the Director of Public Prosecutions, who said the law does not “prohibit gender-specific abortions”, according to the Telegraph. And researchers are warning for the first time that there may be a real health risk associated with aircraft noise, reports the Independent. Two studies, published today in the British Medical Journal, found evidence that people living in areas with high levels of noise pollution from passing aeroplanes had a higher risk of heart disease and stroke. A plane takes off from Heathrow. Researchers found that some people living near the airport were up to 20% more likely to suffer cardiovascular disease. Photograph: Steve Parsons/PA If there's a story, report or event you'd like to highlight – or you would like to share your thoughts on any of the healthcare issues in the news today – you can get in touch by leaving a comment below the line or tweeting us at @GdnHealthcare.