After three days of falls, markets are edging higher on hopes a resolution to the US budget and debt ceiling deadlock can be found. On top of that, investors were comforted by confirmation that President Obama had nominated the dovish Janet Yellen as the successor to Federal Reserve chairman Ben Bernanke. However the latest Fed minutes released on Wednesday showed the central bank's members split on whether to begin tapering its monthly bond buying. In the end they decided to leave the $85bn programme in place. With further meetings in the US planned to discuss the deadlock, the FTSE 100 has added 53.17 points to 6391.08. Mike van Dulken, head of research at Accendo Markets, Another mixed session in Asia [followed] a late bounce in the US to close just positive, amid speculation that both sides in Washington could be working towards a budget deal comprising a short-term raising of the debt ceiling by Friday, to release the nation's government from its partial shutdown and avoid a possible technical sovereign default. Are Republicans finally softening on Obamacare? The Federal Reserve minutes were interesting in the split on tapering (those for fearing loss of credibility, those against saying economy not ready and political/fiscal/financial headwinds), but still aiming for 2013 tapering and 2014 end. Note the minutes are from September's meeting before the Washington impasse took hold, so views likely changed given impact on fourth quarter GDP. Among the risers GKN has added 7.1p to 350.3p after poaching Adam Walker from media group Informa as its new finance director to replace the retiring William Seeger. Informa has fallen 9p to 501p. But Panmure Gordon issued a buy note on Informa, saying that with the departure of Walker and the retirement of chief executive Peter Rigby, the chances of a break-up had increased: Rigby and Walker, to a lesser extent, were the architects of the current group conglomerate structure/strategy. Rational break-up values should yield valuations of more than 600p, in our view. There is no suggestion that either of these departures is trading-related. Ian Whittaker at Liberum Capital took the oppositive view. In a sell note he said: Whatever the reason [for Walker leaving], it is not positive. To us, it also suggests that a short-term break-up of Informa is unlikely (we think Mr Walker would have stayed around to guide this). BAE Systems has climbed 4.3p to 444.3p after a positive update, although it warned that earnings could be hit by 6p to 7p if it fails to reach agreement on pricing with Saudi Arabia over the purchase of 72 Eurofighter Typhoon jets. It also said the US government shutdown had only made a slight impact so far - it had told some 1,200 workers not to come in - but its operations in the country could be harder hit if there is no resolution. Energy group SSE has risen 10p to £14.64 as it became the first supplier to raise prices, up by an average 8.2% next month, and risking a political backlash. Standard Chartered is up 6p to £14.42 despite analysts at Berenberg putting a sell rating on the shares and cutting their target price from £12 to £14.50, saying the bank may have to issue $6bn if new capital in the future. Analysts James Chappell and Michelle Wilson said: Standard Chartered has become too big to grow at double digits without a consequent increase in risk and volatility. Its size also raises issues in terms of its complexity and ability to manage and control the business. Investment banking now represents 42% of revenues. The growth outlook for emerging markets is slowing and has become more volatile, raising cyclical headwinds. Shareholder returns at Standard Chartered could continue to be flat, as they have been for the last five years, if it continues to pursue a growth mandate. In Berenberg's view this could lead to a $6bn capital raise. Berenberg believes its focus needs to switch to returns in order to stop the de-rating that has occurred over the last few years. Industrial group Melrose has risen 1.7p to 291.8p as it sold materials handling specialists Crosby and Acco to KKR for £627.3m. Among the mid-caps, WH Smith has risen 51p to 886p following a 6% rise in full year profits and news of a £50m share buyback. But home shopping specialist N Brown has fallen another 26.6p to 462.4p after Wednesday's update where profits slightly missed expectations.