The Republicans have signaled a willingness to sign on to a temporary extension of the debt ceiling. But how would that work? Guardian finance and economics editor Heidi Moore (@MooreHN) has written an essential explainer, including this excerpt outlining upcoming Treasury payments due: Q: Republicans have said that they would be happy to increase the debt ceiling in six weeks. Why six weeks? That will wreck our Thanksgiving. I want to be thinking roasted turkeys, not Congressional turkeys. A: It’s a strange measure of time - too short to accomplish anything, too long to help the people suffering from the government shutdown. New York Magazine called it a “minimal concession to sanity.” The six-week timeframe seems arbitrary - it’s hard to see why Nov. 22 would be special, except that it is the anniversary of JFK’s assassination. The Treasury says it will run out of money on October 17, and since the Treasury is the only one that sees how much money is coming in and going out, we have to believe them. There, are however, ways that the Treasury may be able to handle its money differently, the same way we economize or think fast when our bank accounts are getting low. Q: I have $350 in my checking account, but tomorrow is payday, so. How low is the Treasury’s bank account? A: Treasury says it will have about $30 billion in cash on hand as of October 17, and $120 billion of bills to pay on the same day. That doesn’t mean we’re hitting a wall. Barclays analysts point out that the U.S. Treasury could collect over $100bn in revenues between October 17 and 31. Q: That looks like a wall to me. What bills does the Treasury have coming up, and why does it believe it can’t pay them? A: Well, like we said, the Treasury has to pay $120 billion on October 17, and another $93 billion on October 24, according to Barclays. Those payments are things like Social Security and benefits for military veterans. Then, the bigger problem is that the Treasury has to pay $5.9 billion of interest on existing Treasury bonds on October 31, and a huge $30.9bn interest payment on November 15, according to Moody’s. Here’s a handy chart of all the different payments, which also comes through Barclays research analysts: Read the whole thing here.