So here we go again: another "free" web service with a silly name, some revenues (but still not enough to cover its operating costs), and a business model that seems, well, a bit sketchy, heading for a stock market flotation. Accompanying this we have the usual hoopla: frenzied speculation about "valuations"; serious looking bankers in suits touting spreadsheets which purport to give a rational basis for numbers plucked out of the air; gossip columnists speculating on how much the company's founders will be "worth "after the first day's trading. And there are also legions of "normal" people shaking their heads and wondering how a company with a few employees and no physical product can be worth more than an enterprise that makes real things and sells them to customers. The obvious comparison is with Facebook. After all, they're both "social networking services", aren't they? But Facebook is much bigger – with 1.15 billion users, compared with Twitter's paltry 215 million has grown faster, and earns way more revenue per user. Twitter is hoping to raise $1bn from its initial public offering (IPO), which is closer to the $1.6bn that Google raised in 2004 than to the $16bn that Facebook aimed at in 2012. And Twitter and Facebook are alike in that all of their business models appear, ultimately, to depend on advertising. Or, to put it more crudely, on "monetising" their users. But while it's obvious what Facebook is – a social-networking service – a root definition of Twitter is much more elusive. In its S-1 Filing (the document a company has to file with the US Securities and Exchange Commission in order to get the stock market flotation), the company's owners describe it as "a global platform for public self-expression and conversation in real time". By developing "a fundamentally new way for people to create, distribute and discover content", they claim to "have democratised content creation and distribution, enabling any voice to echo around the world instantly and unfiltered". That sounds about right but it covers a multitude. And what it means is that Twitter is different things to different people. For some, it is a way to plug into the thought-stream of people whose work they value or admire. For others, it's an ego-trip amplifier. For celebs, it's just another publicity tool. For their unfortunate fans it's a way of kidding themselves that they are, somehow, gaining admittance to an inner circle. For bloggers, it's a way of giving their posts a chance of gaining some traction or attention. For non-bloggers, it's a channel for sharing interesting links and gossip. For sports fans, it's a channel for complaining about the referee. For millions, it's a way of having your own broadcasting station for transmitting your exasperated rants about the coalition, Obamacare, the Today programme, call-centre music, Ryanair or whatever is getting under your skin. And so on and so on, ad infinitum. And all in what has come to be known, quaintly, as real time. Put all those (and more) into a blender, whizz gently and what do you get? Answer: a strange combination of wire service and coffee shop. Tweet sent by @jkrums. One of the seminal moments in Twitter's evolution came on 15 January 2009, when US Airways flight 1549 ran into a flock of birds and crash-landed in the Hudson river. A Twitter user named Janis Krums tweeted a photograph of the stricken aircraft together with the text: "There's a plane in the Hudson. I'm on the ferry going to pick up the people. Crazy." Which is how the world got to know about the accident a full 15 minutes before the "professional" news organisations were able to get the word out. And how the rest of us woke up to the fact that we had accidentally acquired the kind of wire service that once was the exclusive prerogative of those aforementioned organisations. As for the coffee shop dimension, one didn't have to look further than what happened during the television debates between the British party leaders in the 2010 general election when Twitter became an astonishing back-channel for live, second-by-second commentary on the debate which was far more entertaining, and enlightening, than anything the official participants said. And one realised that, here, finally, was a medium that could cut broadcast television down to size. Despite Facebook's size and reach, and its much-vaunted role in the short-lived Arab spring, there are reasons for thinking that Twitter may be the more important service for the future of the public sphere – that is, the space in which democracies conduct public discussion. The fact that Twitter has fewer users and that they might not be demographically representative might, paradoxically, make them more influential in shaping opinion for the simple reason that they are more likely than the average Joe to express or articulate political views. And there is some evidence to suggest that tweeted sentiment on some ideological issues actually tracks more rigorous methods of opinion polling. In a less abstruse way, Twitter has already shown itself to be a useful conduit for circumventing legal or governmental censorship. In the UK, for example, it provided the means for circumventing the intricate web of legal injunctions and super-injunctions which had kept the Trafigura case out of the public domain. When WikiLeaks was deprived of DNS services during the "Cablegate" controversy – which had the effect of making the site unfindable for a time – Twitter provided the channel by which information on the current URL was disseminated until normal service was restored. To date, the owners of Twitter have been alert to the sensitive role that their system plays in our information ecosystem. They seem to have been slightly better, for example, than some other online providers at pushing back on government demands for personal information about their users. All of which means that the metamorphosis of Twitter from a privately held company to a public one is more significant than most stock-market flotations. Public corporations are like nation states in one respect, namely that while they may bleat (or boast) about their "values", in the end they are driven only by their national or corporate interests – which in practice means the interests of shareholders. Standing up to governments on ethical grounds is not something of which shareholders generally approve, especially if doing so might incur legal or financial penalties. And here we see the biggest weakness of so-called "free" services such as Facebook and Twitter. In order to prosper commercially they have to invent ways of monetising their users. To date, that seems to have been mostly achieved by intruding on their privacy in order to target them with advertisements. The trick is to be able to do this without irritating them so much that they eventually pack up and leave. Facebook is now careering down this slippery slope, and every ingenious, manipulative twist of the algorithms it uses to determine what is displayed in a user's timeline seems to increase its downward velocity. In contrast, Twitter's monetising drive has been relatively discreet up to now. Its "promoted tweet" service, for example, didn't launch until 2010 (four years after the company's foundation), and the frequency of promoted tweets – and of other new services such as "promoted trends" – has been fairly unobtrusive up to now. The big question is whether this self-denying ordinance will survive the transition to Wall Street. Personally, I hope it does. I could easily live without Facebook; but Twitter is something I would really miss.