President Obama is calling congressional leaders from both main parties to the White House on Monday afternoon in an attempt to break the political stalemate and avert a crisis over the nation’s debt ceiling that could have calamitous repercussions to economies around the world. Ahead of the White House gathering, Harry Reid and Mitch McConnell, the Democratic and Republican chiefs in the Senate, held in-person talks designed to break the stalemate that the two leaders hit over the weekend over how to handle the $16.7 trillion debt limit and the annual spending budget that have become perilously intertwined. No deal is yet in sight, but hopes are rising that a possible solution to the crisis might be ready to present the president at 3pm. The latest White House effort comes as time is running out before the Treasury department begins to default on its current payments at midnight on Thursday. The looming debt crisis is exacerbating the disruption already caused by the partial shutdown of the US government now in its 14th day.  Should the two parties agree to fast track any deal that is reached, the latest they could file a cloture motion would be Wednesday if they are to avoid breaking Thursday’s critical deadline on the debt limit. As time ticks away, world financial leaders are sounding an increasingly shrill alarm, with Christine Lagarde of the International Monetary Fund saying US default would cause “massive disruption around the world”. So far, Wall Street has remained relatively calm about the pending crisis. Stocks fell in early trading on Monday on news of the breakdown in budget talks, though by a modest 70 points, or 0.5%, on the Dow Jones industrial average. A bi-partisan group of congress members led by Susan Collins, a Republican senator for Maine, held two hours of talks on Monday trying to free the talks from their current standstill. A proposed compromise put forward by Collins over the weekend was rejected by the Democratic leadership. Joe Manchin, a senator from West Virginia and one of six Democrats who have been working with Republicans to try to find a compromise, said the sanguine response of the markets should not be misread. On Monday, he told Fox News: “I just think that every additional hour that we wait, not doing something, is the uncertainty that, basically, the markets are going to get more skittish. The markets start getting skittish, and they start turning … it's hard to turn them around that quick.” Bob Corker, a Republican senator from Tennessee who is also involved in the negotiations, said the pendulum had been swinging wildly. At first Republicans had over-reached in their demands to delay the president's healthcare law; then Democrats had over-reached by demanding to reduce spending cuts. “But I do sense that people are getting back on the right page here. And I do hope that by the end of the day we'll have an agreement that makes sense for our country,” Corker told NBC’s Today show. As negotiations go down to the wire, the leadership of the two parties are tussling over two main elements of a deal – how far to push back the debt ceiling and how to deal with spending cuts designed to close the budget deficit. With Republicans having suffered severely in the polls over their controversial decision to link budget talks with their virulent opposition to Obamacare, the Democrats are seen to be holding the upper hand, though any perceived intransigence on their side may yet rebound against them as the debt-limit precipice approaches. Under the original Collins proposal, the debt ceiling would be extended until 31 January while cuts across several government departments, known as the sequestration, would also be continued until 15 January. The Democrats want the debt ceiling to be pushed further back to the Spring, and the sequestration cuts to be eased. Should Thursday night’s deadline be crossed, the US government will rapidly find it impossible to meet its bills, as it has just $30bn left in its coffers. Huge jolts to the confidence of the system would come in quick succession, starting with 31 October when investors are owed interest on Treasury bonds and followed by $60bn of payments for Medicare, social security and other entitlements that the government would be unable to meet on 1 November.