Republican and Democratic leaders in the Senate were scrambling towards a deal that would avert the looming crisis over the US debt ceiling, as the threat of failure to reach an agreement finally appeared to have concentrated minds in Washington. Harry Reid and Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority and minority leaders, held two lengthy meetings on Monday in an attempt to nail down terms of a possible compromise. The urgency of the talks was matched by the scale of the crisis facing them: unless an agreement is reached on raising America’s borrowing limit by midnight on Thursday, the US will begin to default on its payments, with possible global economic ramifications. Obama postponed a 3pm White House gathering of congressional leaders to give McConnell and Reid extra time to fine-tune a package. "My hope is that a spirit of co-operation will move us forward over the next few hours," the president said earlier in the day, adding the ominous note that "if we don't start making some real progress in the House and the Senate, and if Republicans aren't willing to set aside some of their partisan concerns in order to do what's right for the country, we stand a good chance of defaulting." The Dow Jones industrial average added 64.15 points, or 0.4%, to close at 15,301.26. The index was down as much as 100 points earlier in the day. Reid and McConnell, under massive pressure to find a way out of the impasse, made positive noises upon emerging from their negotiating sessions, though without anything concrete to show. McConnell said he was optimistic that a deal acceptable to both sides was within reach, and Reid went further, saying he hoped an outcome would now be sealed that would reopen the government – now in its 14th day of partial shutdown – ensure that the country continued paying its bills, and begin “long-term negotiations to put our country on sound fiscal footing”. "I'm very optimistic that we that we will reach an agreement that's reasonable in nature this week," Reid said. Though the detail of any final settlement was still in the balance, the broad terms of a compromise appeared to be emerging. On the most urgent problem – the threat that come Friday the US would begin to default on its payments – the warring parties were working towards a peace deal that would raise the debt ceiling through at least next February and possibly into the spring. That has been the central concern of Obama and fellow Democratic leaders, who have said they are not prepared to see the financial credibility of the US held to ransom by Republican negotiators. When the US came close to defaulting in 2011 it led to one agency downgrading America's credit rating. The toxicity of the current crisis is partly the result of the entanglement of the debt crisis with fraught political fighting over Obama’s healthcare law, and over the national budget and deficit. The sinking approval ratings Republicans have suffered since 1 October appear to have persuaded party leaders to detach the battle against Obamacare from the current wrangle, meaning health provisions are likely to feature minimally, if at all, in any final deal. The other major element, the US budget, also appears to be nearing resolution, with party bosses homing in on an agreement that would see the government reopen until a fresh deadline of 15 January, giving them time to come up with a longer-term formula for how to reduce the deficit. The see-saw on Capitol Hill was reflected in the reactions of the markets. Stocks fell moderately on Monday morning as talks stood at a standstill, but rose later as the mood improved. Agreement between Reid and McConnell would not be the end of the trauma that has engulfed Washington these past few weeks. A Senate deal would then have to be put before the House of Representatives, where most of the hardline and Tea Party-aligned Republicans who spearheaded the showdown with the White House are concentrated. What it could mean What is the debt ceiling? Congress has imposed an annual borrowing limit on the US Treasury, which this year is about $16.7tn (£10.4tn). Like most western countries, the US has borrowed heavily in recent years to maintain spending while tax revenues dipped. Treasury secretary Jack Lew believes the government will run out of money on Thursday. Unless a deal can be done to raise the ceiling. Will the US default on its entire debt? Technically, the next time government debt comes up for renewal the Treasury will be unable to repay its lenders. Any time from 17 October lenders around the world could in theory consider the US bankrupt and demand all their money back. But that is unlikely – Treasury bonds could be even more sought after as other areas of the financial system become more precarious. Would it endanger the world economy? Stock markets have dipped on fears of a default and could dive in reaction to the real thing, sparking a collapse in confidence akin to the 2008 Lehman Brothers crash. Confidence is key to investment and private sector spending. Tharman Shanmugaratnam, Singapore’s finance minister and chairman of the International Monetary Fund’s key policymaking committee, said: “Private investment relies on confidence and if we don’t see a resolution of the US ­fiscal dispute it is hard to see how that is going to come back.” Will it threaten the UK economy? Britain would be hit hard by a US ­recession. Many of the UK’s exports go to America. Without growth in the US the UK could see its fragile recovery snuffed out. BAE Systems, Britain’s ­biggest manufacturing employer, is warning of problems ahead. BAE has half its business in the US and has ­frozen the wages of 1,200 staff in ­Washington. ­Fellow arms firm Chemring saw its shares plummet last week. Meanwhile, outsourcing firms G4S and Serco have US staff unable to work. Will the consequences be similar to the credit crunch? A loss of confidence in financial markets could undermine the crucial $2tn repo market – the system by which banks keep their funding ticking over with short term loans to each other, often backed up by US government bonds. The market is lightly regulated and any problems could ripple out into a wider credit crunch. Phillip Inman