Republicans in Congress who forced a two-week government shutdown and took the country to the brink of a possible default will meet on Tuesday morning for what will be a pivotal moment for the last-ditch efforts to resolve the crisis. Unless a deal to raise the US debt limit is struck in the next 48 hours, senior administration officials have warned that the US would be unable to pay creditors, an unprecedented situation that economists warn could precipitate the country's first ever default – an economic disaster that could ripple across the world. John Boehner, the Republican speaker of the House of Representatives, was scheduled to test how inclined the GOP conference is to endorsing the imminent deal forged in the Senate, in a meeting scheduled for 9am ET. Although not yet finalised, the Senate proposal would reportedly reopen the government and extend the US borrowing limit for another three or four months. The agreement, being finalised between Senate majority leader Harry Reid and his Republican counterpart, Mitch McConnell, was not expected to contain any proposals that come close to satisfying the demands of Tea Party hardliners, who set out two weeks ago to block or significantly undermine Barack Obama's healthcare reforms. The conservative wing of the Republican party in the House holds considerable sway of the leadership, and Tuesday's meeting, held in the basement of the Capitol building, will be a crucial test of how many members are prepared to cave. It should shed light on whether Boehner, under enormous pressure to avert a potential economic catastrophe should the US default, would hold a vote on any Senate deal without the backing of most of his party. Senate Republicans and Democrats were scheduled to meet their respective leaders separately on Tuesday morning to discuss the possible deal, before it is publicly announced. Without an increase to the debt ceiling authorised by Congress, the US Treasury will lose its authority to borrow money to pay its debts. Even if Reid and McConnell announce a deal early on Tuesday – and quickly move to a vote in the Senate – time will fast be running out to pass a vote in the second chamber. On Monday, Obama postponed a 3pm White House gathering of congressional leaders after it became clear that McConnell and Reid were close to a deal and needed extra time to fine-tune a package and test the water among their respective parties. Both men made positive noises upon emerging from their negotiating sessions, though without anything concrete to show. McConnell said he was optimistic that a deal acceptable to both sides was within reach, and Reid went further, saying he hoped an outcome would now be sealed that would reopen the government. Negotiators were in talks late into the night on Monday, and any agreed framework could yet change. However, there were multiple reports that the two senior senators had agreed a package which would involve funding the government until 15 January, a stopgap measure that would allow for extensive negotiations over government spending levels. The debt ceiling would also be raised, but only until early- or mid-February, according to the reports. There may be some other small concessions relating to relatively minor tweaks to aspects of the Affordable Care Act, but the healthcare law, which came into force the day the shutdown began, would remain intact. That is likely to prove a sticking point at Tuesday morning's meeting of House Republicans, who will have little to show for precipitating the first government shutdown in almost two decades except for a significant drop in popularity revealed by in recent polls. The 15-day shutdown has paralysed large sections of government since and revealed a deep rift in the Republican party. The partial closure of government initially led to 800,000 federal employees being furloughed, although 400,000 military workers were later recalled. In addition to the mothballing of key government departments and agencies, national parks, memorials and public lands across the US have been closed, proving particularly damaging to some rural economies – many of which are in Republican districts. The ambition of Tea Party Republicans was to use the shutdown, and a subsequent refusal to raise the debt limit, as leverage to force the defunding of Obamacare. That objective that was then relegated to postponing of the so-called individual mandate – a key component of the law that compels individuals to get insurance. The deal now being mooted on Capitol Hill, which is also said to contain components of a proposal first raised by Republican senator Susan Collins, falls well short of either of those GOP House demands. It would also fail to lock in automatic spending cuts, known as the sequester, beyond January – a goal some Republicans had hoped they would achieve. Hardliners are already indicating they will vote against any deal that fails to undermine Obamacare or radically alter the fiscal balance. These ardent conservatives are also challenging the conventional wisdom – and testimony from the US Treasury secretary, Jack Lew, that the US would be at high risk of default once its borrowing authority expires on Thursday. Tea Party Republican Raul Labrador said in a CNN interview on Monday that the deal apparently being reached in the Senate would not get his support. "It has nothing to do with Obamacare," he said. "If there are no systemic changes to our debt, to our entitlement programs, then I would vote no on raising the debt ceiling." However, on Monday, markets appeared optimistic of a last-minute deal in Washington. In Europe, the FTSE 100 index of leading British shares was up 0.9%, while Germany's DAX rose 0.8%.