3.29pm ET Somehow the American League Championship Series between the Boston Red Sox and the Detroit Tigers is tied at 1-1. This didn't look like it was going to be the case on Sunday night, when the Tigers had the Red Sox on the ropes for much of game two, as probable Cy Young winner Max Scherzer kept the Sox off the scoreboard as the Tigers hitters teed off on Boston starter Clay Buchholz for a total of five runs. For Boston fans, it felt like a repeat of Saturday's game one where Anibal Sanchez and the Detroit Tigers were working on combined no-hitter until the ninth inning and shut down the Sox 1-0. Then, David Ortiz happened. To no one's surprise, Detroit's biggest weakness this postseason has been their bullpen so it wasn't entirely shocking when things began to unravel immediately after Tigers manager Jim Leyland pulled his starter out of the game after seven masterful innings with the score 5-1. Three relievers later the bases were full for David Ortiz, literally the last hitter a team wants to face in a key moment in a postseason game. Instead of bringing in lefty Phil Coke to neutralize Big Papi, Leyland brought in his closer Joaquin Benoit to face Ortiz, who now represented the tying run. Ortiz swung at the first pitch for a grand slam that tied the game and brought Fenway Park back to life. After this it was essentially inevitable that the Sox were going to take the game, which they did in walk-off fashion in the bottom of the 9th as catcher Jarrod Saltalamacchia knocked in Jonny Gomes for the winning run, stunning the Tigers who seemed to have a 2-0 start in the bag. Because of these late game heroics, it looks like the Red Sox should have all of the momentum heading into Comerica Park this afternoon, but the truth is that Tigers return to Detroit having done what they needed to do. They split the first two games in Fenway, where the Red Sox are significantly more dangerous, with a good chance to take command of the series in this upcoming home stretch. Furthermore, they have Justin Verlander on the mound today, who is literally always a threat to throw a no-hitter in any situation even the playoffs, going against the Red Sox's John Lackey who has had a resurgent year but pitches much better at home than on the road. Momentum, of course, is only as good as next game's starting pitcher, and the Tigers have a damn good one. Still the Tigers have let the Red Sox back into this series, so it will be interesting to see how the Tigers respond this afternoon in game three, as difference between being 2-1 rather than 1-2 in a seven game series feels an awful lot bigger than just a single game. In other words, expect even more tension and drama today. If you'd like to be part of that drama, please send us your questions, comments, predictions, arguments about the existence or non-existence of clutch hitters etc., we'll use them throughout the liveblog. You can email them to Hunter.Felt.Freelance@theguardian.com or tweet them to @HunterFelt. It's the Boston Red Sox vs the Detroit Tigers in Comerica Park for game three of the American League Championship Series. We'll have first pitch at 4:07pm EST/9:07pm BST but fear not, we will be back much shorter with predictions, starting lineups and possibly Petrarchan sonnets about Big Papi: