The word "brinksmanship". I've used it twice today already! A relatively new word to the English language, it was coined by Secretary of State John Foster Dulles in 1956 to describe the nuclear arms race between Russia and the United States. Already a $2-word, it's now cost the US economy $24bn. The cold war is long over, but has anyone told Congress? Winners Ted Cruz. The punchline for a thousand Twitter humorists and the lead for most of the many stories about GOP dysfunction, Cruz is laughing in that whiny way of his all the way to the campaign war chest. He raised over $1m in the third quarter that ended 1 October, before the shutdown, half of it through the new "Ted Cruz Victory Committee" formed last year specifically to benefit from Cruz's "defund Obamacare" petition. Cruz's floor speech before the Senate vote seemed to imply that the fundraising was continuing at that pace; he referred to the "millions of millions [sic] of American people rising up across this country, over two million people signing a national petition to defund Obamacare". The online petition is also an email harvesting gambit from the Senate Conservative Fund, the PAC that helped bring Cruz to Washington in the first place. Harry Reid. The former pugilist only won a technical knockout, but that's probably the way the Senate majority leader likes it. That Reid's compact and focused rage held Democrats together and in chorus was obvious from the outside. Senator Dick Durbin's insinuation that we will "never know, you will never know, how much he put in to accomplish this" only ups the suspicions about the incredible power Reid wields. Nancy Pelosi. Drudge called it, naming the Democratic congresswoman from California the once and future Speaker of the House. In other words, Matt Drudge thinks the Democrats have a serious chance of winning back the House of Representatives in the 2014 midterms. Or, you know, he could have been trolling us. Barack Obama. He gave a short statement between the Senate and House votes, but he really could have just dropped the mic. The president has often been called out by the progressive wing of his party for being too ready to compromise; this time, facing the Tea Party-inspired threat to "defund Obamacare", he showed all the flexibility of a railway tie. Those liberal Democrats may think they had a point. John McCain. The septuagenarian's bipolar relationship with the media started on the upswing with his early ridicule of Cruz (though now Cruz wears "wackobird" as a badge of honor). With the threat of a shutdown, the love affair really flared back up. McCain gave both earnest indictments of the strategy and exasperated quips. He dusted off the chestnut that congressional popularity is down to "paid staffers and blood relatives" and declared sarcastically of the GOP, "We're livin' the dream." National parks and monuments. We have them! Republicans have in the past proposed massive cuts in spending on parks and raised eyebrows at the expansion of national monuments, but obviously, they'll be planning their vacations and budgets differently now. Mitch McConnell. The turtle mostly kept his head down during the shutdown, but in negotiating the end of the shutdown, he must have done something right: The bill specifically increases potential funding for Kentucky's Olmsted Dam from $775m to $2.9b. Progressives and conservatives have both attacked it as a McConnell goodie, "the Kentucky Kickback," but others report that Obama requested the increase in authorized (not allocated) spending. Pandas. The National Zoo's PandaCam was the shutdown's cutest symbol; the vacuum of its absence, panda fans sought out other sources for their fix: the ones at the San Diego zoo and in Atlanta. But perhaps, the relative paucity of panda cams has helped alert the world to the plight of the adorable endangered species. Congressional reporters. The White House is a sexier beat, but it's Congress where the action is – and this became clear to even a casual observer over the past few weeks. White House correspondents looked better on television, but didn't have much to report. Rumpled and sleep-deprived congressional reporters (viz: Robert Costa) became the shutdown's media stars. Losers Majority rule. While the fundamental principle of democracy seems to have survived the 16-day crisis, the fact of the shutdown and the tiny minority of congressmen that created it, the Tea Party Republicans of the House have nonetheless managed to poke serious holes in the constitution they hold so dear. Presumably, the second amendment was left unscathed. Economic principles. People who didn't even know what the debt limit was last month now think it's some kind of conspiracy. Even as the US dodged a bullet this time – though suffering the collateral damage of further credit-rating downgrades – one can't help feeling that we haven't heard the last of the GOP's new caucus of "debt default skeptics". "False equivalence" reporting. James Fallows at the Atlantic documented some of the worst offenders and as "it's everybody's fault" became a Republican talking point, many media critics joined him in denouncing the faux-even-handedness as actually putting a finger on the scale. The "serious people" trope (as in, "serious people are above partisan bickering") popularized by op-ed writers such as Michael Kinsley and Ron Fournier became especially ridiculous as the crisis wore on. Kinsley's column beseeching Obama to "give in" to Republicans "for the sake of the country" ("media will no doubt call Obama weak"!) should be taught as a cautionary example against this desire to be "taken seriously". Agencies and individuals whose programs' funding were slashed by the sequester. For a brief moment, politicians and reporters were reminded that the shutdown hurt so many people (scientists, the court system, children), so much, in part because they were already victims of a pointless political staring contest: the heedless cuts imposed when the Congress failed to come to an agreement over the last budget deadline, aka the sequester. But that moment passed, and, oh well … Cans, footballs, goal posts, and all manner of other innocent metaphors. Sure, the compromise legislation that pushed the prospect of another budget battle and debt ceiling crisis into early 2014 just "kicked the can down the road", but will no one think of the cans? Paul Ryan. Who? Backwards baseball cap, windbreaker? Oh, the guy that wrote a shutdown op-ed that rankled what Tea Party support he had left and then wound up voting against the bill that will give him the Senate-House budget conference he's been advocating for days. Yeah, him. Congress. In what may be my favorite poll of all time, Public Policy Polling pitted Congress' approval against a wide variety of most-loathed cultural icons. Congress, they showed, is now less popular than zombies, witches, mother-in-laws, and even hipsters. (Prompting a few of us to wonder what would happen if Congress was made up of hipsters.) The GOP. I mean, really. • Editor's note: the article originally stated the shutdown cost as $24m; this was amended to $24bn at 3.15pm (ET) on 17 October