The US federal government gradually came back to life on Thursday after a 16-day shutdown and a bruising political battle, as the political recriminations from the crisis reverberated around Washington. Republican rancour over the budget deal boiled over with accusations that hardliners in the party had trashed their reputation and handed a gift to their political opponents. Democrats emerged from the crisis united and emboldened. In remarks delivered at the White House, President Barack Obama was scathing about the Republicans’ doomed bit to dismantle his healthcare reforms and undermine his authority. Visibly angry, he told them: "You don't like a president? Go out and win an election." Nancy Pelosi, the Democratic minority leader in the House of Representatives, highlighted the cost of the shutdown as estimated by Standard & Poor’s and blamed it on Republicans, saying: "Was their temper tantrum worth $24bn?" There was also fury between Republicans when details emerged of a last-minute add-on to the bill that reopened the government and extended the federal borrowing limit. The bill authorised $2.8bn on infrastructure work to the Ohio river in Kentucky, where Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell is facing a tough re-election battle. It will also improve navigation along the river, which passes within 20 miles of the Ohio congressional district represented by the House speaker, John Boehner. Senator John McCain, a former Republican presidential candidate, said the plan had been slipped in the at the last minute and was “disgraceful”. Wednesday night’s deal to end the crisis will fund the government until 15 January and lift the debt ceiling until 7 February, setting the stage for a possible repeat of the showdown. Both sides also agreed to a formal budget conference, in an attempt to reach a longer-term deal by 13 December. National park service rangers walk back to their vehicle after visiting the Jefferson Memorial in Washington. Photograph: Kevin Lamarque/Reuters On Thursday, senior Republicans were divided about the wisdom of their high-risk strategy of forcing the shutdown and bringing the US close to defaulting on its debt. "This was a terrible idea," McCain told CNN. He said it would not happen again when the next deadlines arrive, and added: "I guarantee it." McConnell also said the party would not repeat the tactic. “One of my favorite sayings is an old Kentucky saying, 'There’s no education in the second kick of a mule',” he said, in an interview with the National Journal. “The first kick of the mule was in 1995; the second one was the last 16 days. A government shutdown is off the table. We’re not going to do it.” He also hinted that there may be more compromise to come between Republicans and the White House, in forthcoming budget discussions over taxes and welfare payments. “The price for entitlement reform, so far from the administration, has been taxes,” added McConnell. “There is some willingness to discuss trading entitlement spending reductions for discretionary spending relief. But, so far, there has been no real willingness on the part of the administration to do that. That’s worth discussing, though.” Stalled agenda Hoping to jump start his own stalled agenda, Obama urged lawmakers to concentrate on three items in the coming weeks: a balanced plan to reduce long-term deficits, legislation to overhaul the immigration system and passage of a farm bill. This may prove wishful thinking, given the continued rancour and recriminations among Republicans. Obama's party, meanwhile, emerged from the three-week showdown in Congress united. All Democrats in Congress supported the legislation that passed on Wednesday night, to fund the government and raise the debt limit. Of the Republicans, 18 in the Senate and 144 in the House opposed the legislation, while 27 in the Senate and 87 in the House supported it. The fault line separated Tea Party adherents from the balance of the rank and file, and there were clear signs the split will be enduring. In Mississippi, where Republican senator Thad Cochran has not yet announced if he will seek a new term in 2014, the Club for Growth and Senate Conservatives Fund endorsed a potential rival, the Republican state senator Chris McDaniel. The group is among several that have played an increasingly active role in Republican primary elections in recent years, often supporting Tea Party-aligned challengers.  Another group, Heritage Action, played an influential role in the two-week political showdown. In the days leading to the impasse, it was a strong backer of the campaign to demand that "Obamacare" be defunded in exchange for Republican approval of funding for the government. On Tuesday, as it was hosting a fundraiser at a high-end golf resort in Bandon, Oregon, the group weighed in to oppose legislation that Boehner put together in hope of retaining influence in final negotiations. Americans for Limited Government, meanwhile, attacked Representative Scott Rigell, of Virginia, who voted for the legislation that reopened the government and raised the debt limit. Noting that the measure had not defunded the healthcare law, the group said the congressman "owns Obamacare just as much as if it had been a vote to adopt it in the first place". In a statement issued in connection with his vote, Rigell said he was voting for the bill "given the lack of a viable alternative at this moment". Vice-president Joe Biden greets Environmental Protection Agency workers as they return to work after 16 days of a government shutdown. Photograph: Jacquelyn Martin/AP Around the country on Thursday, federal workers returned to their jobs. Erin Klein, who tracks US radio stations for the Broadcasting Board of Governors, was relieved to be returning to work in Washington and was keen to check on the status of the database she manages. "I can't believe we have been gone so long. I'm very glad to be back," she said. Asim Akbari, a lawyer at the Department of Health and Human Services, said he had first heard that he would be allowed back when watching the news about the congressional deal. "Almost the whole department has been out,” he said. “I was surprised when I checked my email this morning how empty it was." Many federal workers have been explicitly banned even from monitoring work emails during the shutdown. "We were paid for four days during the first week, but we were due our next pay next week, so the shutdown has ended just in time," Akbari said. The vice-president, Joe Biden, greeted workers returning to the Environmental Protection Agency with hugs, handshakes and muffins. "There was no economic rationale for any of this," he said. "I hope everybody walks away with a lesson that this is unnecessary and I hope we can regain the trust of the American people." Visitors walk through the Korean War Veterans Memorial after it was reopened to the public in Washington. Photograph: Kevin Lamarque/Reuters Tourists in the capital, who have been deprived of some of the country's best-known sights, flocked to the reopened destinations – though not all were open. The National Zoo and National Archives were both closed until Friday and the National Gallery of Art was set to reopen on Saturday. Standing on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial, Shen Ling, 29, a teacher from China, said she and her friends had heard the news that the shutdown was over in Chicago airport, as they were about to board their flight. "We had prepared for the worst," she said. Another Chinese tourist, on the National Mall with his fiancée, said he had not followed the politics of the fiscal crisis closely. "But this is what happens when you have two parties," he quipped. "One party is better.” The Associated Press contributed to this report