10.51am ET Welcome to our liveblog coverage of President Obama's attempt to head off a building wave of alarm over problems with the government's new healthcare website. Three weeks after its launch, healthcare.gov is plagued by slowness, error messages and glitches. For many users it simply does not work. The federal site is the key portal for all new insurance consumers, and the only place to shop online for consumers in states that have not set up sites – and corresponding marketplaces – of their own. It's more than an IT issue. Under the Affordable Care Act, Americans are required to obtain health insurance by January 2014. About 7m Americans were expected to use healthcare.gov to sign up for plans by March, according to the Congressional Budget Office. Insurance companies have written new business models to sell coverage on the new marketplaces, called exchanges. Consumers have had to re-think their household budgets and their coverage options. The president, who is due to appear in the Rose Garden at 11.25am ET, is expected to explain how the government is striving to repair the web site problem. On Sunday the (nicely functioning) Department of Health and Human Services website carried an advisory acknowledging problems with healthcare.gov and promising a "tech surge" to fix them: Unfortunately, the experience on HealthCare.gov has been frustrating for many Americans. Some have had trouble creating accounts and logging in to the site, while others have received confusing error messages, or had to wait for slow page loads or forms that failed to respond in a timely fashion. The initial consumer experience of HealthCare.gov has not lived up to the expectations of the American people. We are committed to doing better. To ensure that we make swift progress, and that the consumer experience continues to improve, our team has called in additional help to solve some of the more complex technical issues we are encountering. Our team is bringing in some of the best and brightest from both inside and outside government to scrub in with the team and help improve HealthCare.gov. A program-wide failure to launch would burn many insurers and Americans who have acted to comply with the law, and a worst-case scenario could disrupt the insurance industry, leave more Americans uninsured than before and drive up prices for everyone else. The problem that Obamacare was built to address remains: millions of Americans need health support and don’t have it. It is not difficult to find commentators who would argue that President Obama's legacy hangs in the balance, along with the whole liberal project, in the sense that if this doesn't work it will be a very long time before government has the trust and impetus to try a big new social program again.  Republicans are leading the effort to warn the public about problems with the Obamacare rollout. The House energy and commerce committee has scheduled a hearing on the matter for Thursday – one of what are sure to be many, many hearings. However, health secretary Kathleen Sebelius, who is being called on by some elected officials to resign over the unfolding debacle, has said she is unavailable to attend. Updated at 11.22am ET