Lauren and Katelynn hug each other as they attend the first massive gay wedding ceremonies at city hall in the early morning hours of October 21. Photograph: Kena Betancur/Getty Images Same-sex marriage, just a few election cycles back, used to be one of the most combustible questions in politics. Now it can seem positively boring. When judges in New Jersey made it the fourteenth state (and third most populous, after California and New York) to join the club, the good people of cable news spent almost no time talking about the men and women getting married – and much more talking about Chris Christie, the peevish governor who dropped his appeal. Christie has a way of taking up the screen, it's true. But he is not the only story here. Something new did happen. For the first time, the US supreme court's landmark decision in US v Windsor, which struck down the central provision of the Defense of Marriage Act, served as the key to victory. Windsor did not state that gays have a right to marry, it's true. What it did say was that all married couples merit all the benefits of marriage – and that was enough to get Jersey to tip. Why? Because back in 2006, during an earlier push for marriage equality, the state supreme court said (pdf) that gays deserved "every statutory right and benefit conferred to heterosexual couples". They left it to the state legislature to figure out how to confer those rights. The New Jersey legislature responded by introducing civil unions, leaving marriage to heterosexual couples only. So far as the law went, that was good enough. Until June, when Edie Windsor slayed Doma and, all of a sudden, a Jersey civil union and a Jersey marriage were no longer the same thing. Before Windsor, states could hold off on marriage because the federal government shut us out; the only rights gay couples could enjoy were state ones, so "marriage" was just a question of nomenclature. After Windsor, as the New Jersey state supreme court stated unanimously (pdf), that no longer holds: After Windsor, a number of federal agencies extended marital benefits to same-sex couples who are lawfully married, but not to partners in civil unions. As a result, civil-union partners in New Jersey today do not receive the same benefits as married same-sex couples when it comes to family and medical leave, Medicare, tax and immigration matters, military and veterans' affairs, and other areas. The State Constitution's guarantee of equal protection is therefore not being met. That's what makes the Jersey moment worth more attention than it's received. It confirms that there is only one way for gays to win in the long run: not with state-by-state referenda, but through the enforcement of the guarantee of equal protection under the law. Gone are the days when conservatives could make hay by complaining that "activist" judges were perverting age-old principles. The age-old principle is not homophobia, not any longer. The age-old principle is the fourteenth amendment, and its 150-year-old guarantee of equal justice under law. But we would rather talk about Republican Governor Chris Christie, it seems, and a presidential election more than three years away, by which time the federal government might have been shuttered half a dozen times. In dropping his doomed appeal on Monday, Christie did not do much to change the final toll of marriage equality in the state – though it was nice that the couples lining up at the clerk's office in Camden and Princeton didn't have to worry that their new license could be annulled. He did, however, show a ruthlessness and a slipperiness that have characterized his time in office. He is happy to be both a Tea Party-style slasher of taxes and public works projects, unilaterally killing a decades-in-the-making new tunnel under the Hudson River, as well as an ardent advocate of big government in the form of Hurricane Sandy relief. He bashed the Obama administration to get into office, then barely supported Mitt Romney when it was clear he was a goner. And here, too, he reminded us that he has his eyes on one thing only. Earlier this week a bunch of second-tier instapundits decided that this spells trouble for Christie, supposedly just a northeastern RINO (Republican in name only) come primary season. After all, the current narrative in American politics is that the hardcore voters of the GOP care about ideological purity (the Senator Ted Cruz types) more than power. But nationally, the establishment always wins; nationally, you have to follow the money. Big business, not least in the increasingly gay-friendly financial sector, looked upon the shutdown and debt ceiling debacle with horror. They are desperate for a man like Christie to call their own. It is possible, I readily concede, that the suicide caucus will take over the Republican Party completely, and Ted Cruz will be borne to the GOP nomination on a wave of neurotic Obamacare revanchism. But put it this way: the Republican primary in 2016 can only tip in one of two ways. Either the Tea Party fever keeps boiling, in which case Christie – too chummy with Obama and Booker, too close to Wall Street, unwilling to let New Jerseyans drown in a hurricane – doesn't stand a chance in any case. Or else the fever breaks, money talks again, and Christie finds himself sitting pretty on a mountain of cash from union-hating, inequality-fostering, ecocidal business interests that see gay rights as unthreatening to their bottom line. It will be sad, for those of us who see gay rights as part of a larger project of emancipation, to see our relationships and our love minimized in that way. But this is what happens when gay marriage becomes boring: you realize that the battle for the most fundamental forms of equality remains to be waged, and some allies aren't worth having.