The committee will hear from senior executives from CGI Federal, Optum/QSSI, Equifax Workforce Solutions and Serco. Photograph: Healthcare.gov The White House has announced a small relaxation in the penalties for consumers who do not obtain health insurance through the new online marketplaces. The move came hours before a House hearing on Thursday during which a congressional committee is set to quiz the executives whose companies built the struggling healthcare.gov website. Previously, some consumers whose coverage did not begin during the enrollment period would have faced a penalty if they were not insured by 31 March, even though they signed up before the deadline. Now no consumer who signs up during open enrollment faces a penalty, even if their coverage does not begin before the end of March. The disastrous rollout of President Obama's signature healthcare initiative will come under fresh attack Thursday, when a congressional committee will quiz executives from contractors brought in to build healthcare.gov, the web hub for the insurance exchanges set up by the Affordable Care Act, in a hearing entitled: "Implementation failures: didn't know or didn't disclose?" Congressional Republican leaders wrote a letter to the White House office of management and budget's (OMB) chief information officer, Steve VanRoekel, and the US' chief technology officer, Todd Park, in which they suggested that White House meddling is to blame for the flaws in the rollout. Rather than focus on the catalog of issues facing the rollout and suss out how things got this way and how – or whether – they might be fixed, Republicans appear determined to attempt to find a way to blame Obama personally for the failure. "Given the information gathered by the Committee thus far, we are concerned that the administration required contractors to change course late in the implementation process to conceal Obamacare's effect on increasing health insurance premiums," the letter said. "We believe that the political decision to mask the 'sticker shock' of Obamacare to the American people prevented contractors from using universally accepted and OMB-advocated IT 'best practices' in the development and roll out of this massive federal government IT project. When prudent design and programming decisions are subordinated to politics, the result is the chaotic mess we have today." The committee will hear from senior executives from CGI Federal, Optum/QSSI, Equifax Workforce Solutions and Serco. CGI, an information technology company based in Montreal, was the designated lead on creating and maintaining the federal government's portal for the exchanges, the contract for which has been valued at over $54m. The insurance exchanges – which are, essentially, markets that allow people who had bought insurance on their own to join together to get the kinds of favourable rates given to large employers – opened on October 1 and have been selling coverage planned to be effective on January 1, 2014. The Obama administration is aiming to insure 7m people through the scheme, but so far, bugs have led to numerous failures at exchanges across the US. The number of people who have bought coverage is as yet unclear, but almost certainly tiny. On Wednesday, staff for the Republicans who lead the committee holding the hearing, the House committee on energy and commerce, released a memo previewing Wednesday's events in which they make the case that the administration was warned its plans were set to go awry. In June, the memo notes, the government accountability office (GAO) issued a report that concluded that "many key activities [remain] to be completed across the core exchange functions – eligibility and enrollment, including development and implementation of the data hub; program management; and consumer assistance." The memorandum points out that the GAO further stated that "much remains to be accomplished within a relatively short amount of time" and that the "completion of certain activities was behind schedule." Darrell West, founding director of the Center for Technology Innovation at the Brookings Institute, said the investigation was unlikely to uncover evidence that interference from the Obama administration was ultimately responsible for the fiasco. "Interference suggests micro-managment, but this looks more like it wasn't managed at all," he said. He said it appeared that the Obama administration and its contractors had underestimated the scale of the task they had taken on – one West called unprecedented in size and complexity. "The agencies simply didn't have the expertise to oversee a project of this complexity," he said. Building the exchanges' digital infrastructure required not just the creation of a consumer-facing website interface but also the bringing together of a number of different databases of immense size, and the coordination of the whole thing with a large number of insurers all using different systems. "Clearly the administration botched this and needed to spend more time on it and to bring in more people with the right expertise," said West. "They seem to have totally underestimated how difficult this would be. It's hard to fathom given that this is Obama's signature initiative." West said the problems were "fixable", but that the time to address them is short. "They have brought in additional expertise but there isn't as yet much additional detail about what the problems are and what is the timetable to fixing this. That's what we need answers to." The chief executives of more than a dozen health-insurance companies met with some of Obama's advisers Wednesday as part of the White House's efforts to tackle the problems dogging the online market. Jeffrey Zients, a former management consultant now in line to take over as the chief White House economic adviser, has been tasked with overseeing the overhaul of the troubled system. Clay Johnson, the CEO of Department of Better Technology, a company that produces software for the government, said that the technological failures go deep within the system, and that as a result, there will not be easy solutions. "The problem here isn't just the result of bad programming. It's the result of bad systems and bad architecture from the get-go. When you try and build the world's biggest shopping mall and the only place you can buy your support beams from is a balsa-wood mill, your building is going to collapse," Johnson wrote in a blog post. "It was a lack of critical thought about architecture that got you into this problem in the first place. Continuing to not think about architecting a way out of it will make getting out of the mess even worse."