The contractors said it wa the government's responsibility, and not theirs, to make sure the website worked. Photograph: Evan Vucci/AP Contractors involved in the rollout of the exchanges that form a key part of the Affordable Care Act heaped fresh pressure on the White House on Thursday, refusing to take responsibility for glitches with the healthcare.gov website that have threatened to derail President Obama's flagship domestic policy. Testifying before the House energy and commerce committee during the first congressional hearings into the debacle, four contractors repeatedly denied their software was to blame and turned the spotlight instead on the government agency in charge of overseeing the complex system. More than 50 different companies, five government departments and 36 states were involved in building the website, which is designed to help millions of uninsured Americans find affordable coverage from private insurers. But extensive bugs and delays in the registration and enrolment process have now forced the government to postpone a February 15 deadline for purchasing coverage, allowing an extra six weeks before fines are levied on those without insurance. Angry Republicans and Democrats turned on the main private contractors behind the website on Thursday to seek an explanation for the glitches, but largely failed to show who was responsible for design or implementation flaws. The closest admission of failure came from Andrew Slavitt of Maryland-based contractor QSSI, who revealed that systems to check identity were flooded with 178,000 requests on the first day that healthcare.gov was live, after a last-minute government decision to make people create accounts on the site before they could compare insurance products. "After its launch, healthcare.gov was inundated by many more people than anticipated, which overwhelmed systems, including ours," he told the committee. "This was partly caused by a late decision to make people register before they could browse. After initial scalability challenges, the [system] is now keeping up with the demand." Slavitt also claimed his company had warned the government of potential bugs in other systems that it was asked to review, and suggested that the two weeks allotted for testing the system were insufficient. "Months would have been nice," he said. The claims will heap pressure on health and human services secretary Kathleen Sebelius, who is scheduled to appear before the committee next week and already faces calls to resign from some Republicans. The website problems have been seized upon by politicians who oppose the wider Affordable Care Act, dubbed Obamacare, as creeping state-interference. "This shows us why Washington should not be running our private healthcare system," Pennsylvania Republican Tim Murphy said. But such attacks were angrily rejected by Democrats on the committee, who said the problems were being blown out of proportion. "The goal here should be to fix it, not nix it," said Frank Pallone of New Jersey. "The Republicans are not trying to make this better – they are using the website glitches as an excuse to delay or defund Obamacare." Lawmakers were even more exasperated, however, at the unwillingness of contractors to take responsibility or provide estimates of when the problems would be fully fixed. "I cannot give you an exact date," said Cheryl Campbell of prime contractor CGI Federal. "I would prefer not doing that; I don't like to raise expectations." She also repeatedly refused to say whether the website rollout should have been delayed. "It was not our position to tell our client whether they should go live or not go live," Campbell said. "Over the past two weeks, the federal exchange has steadily improved … We have confidence in our ability to deliver successfully." This brought an angry response from California Democrat Anna Eshoo. "You're essentially saying that everything was all right," Eshoo said. "It's not all right!"