8.40am ET Good morning and welcome to our live blog coverage of the first congressional hearing into why healthcare.gov, the government's smiling new $394m website, does not work very well. Executives from four of the technology companies that helped build the website will be appearing before the House energy and commerce committee, with chairman Fred Upton, Republican of Michigan, presiding. It looks to be a potentially rough outing. The White House announced on Wednesday a small relaxation in the rules for penalties for consumers who do not obtain insurance by the end of the open enrollment period, on 31 March. Previously, some consumers whose coverage did not begin during the enrollment period, even though they signed up before the deadline, would have faced a penalty. Now no consumer who signs up during open enrollment faces a penalty, even if their coverage does not begin before the end of March.  Since the launch of the site on 1 October, would-be users have complained of stalled pages, dead ends, error messages, dropped accounts, eternal loading, misinformation, lightning strikes, arrhythmia and gout. Some people have used the site and come away ecstatic about the wonderful new health insurance they were able to buy. But for now those folks appear to be in the minority. Under particular pressure today will be Cheryl Campbell, senior vice-president of CGI Federal, the biggest contractor on the project with a deal for $93.7m to help people create accounts and set up "back end" services. Also in the hot seat will be Andrew Slavitt, executive vice-president of Optum/QSSI, which received $55.1m to create the data interface. More than 55 contractors reportedly worked on the site. A list of the largest ones is here.  The site was meant to be – still means to be – a marvelous one-stop shop for consumers out to buy health insurance. As such it would welcome you; create a secure online identity for you; collect and store your personal information and that of household members; cross-check your income and immigration status; decide whether you qualify for a subsidy; connect you with the appropriate marketplace; advise you on your insurance options; enable the purchase of insurance and communicate the result to the pertinent government agencies and insurers.  Congress members today are likely to focus not only on the contractors' craftsmanship but on the steps they took – or did not take – to raise the alarm that healthcare.gov was in trouble. The hearing is titled "PPACA Implementation Failures: Didn’t Know or Didn’t Disclose?" (Obamacare is the nickname of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.) Health secretary Kathleen Sebelius told CNN on Tuesday that the president did not know about problems with the site until after the launch. She is scheduled to appear before the committee next Wednesday, 30 October.  Updated at 10.11am ET