9.01am BST Clare Horton writes Good morning and welcome to the daily live blog from the Guardian Healthcare Professionals Network. Throughout the day, we'll be bringing you news, comment and analysis from around the web. Last night we presented the first Guardian Healthcare Innovation Awards. We'll be reporting more on the awards – and profiling all the winners and runners up – later in the day. But first, here's a run through this morning's top healthcare stories: The Guardian reports that medical tourism is a lucrative source of income for the NHS. Hhealth editor Sarah Boseley writes that the findings of a study "contradict many of the assumptions behind the government's announcement that it will clamp down on foreigners abusing the health service". She adds: Eighteen hospitals – those deemed most likely to be making money from overseas patients – earned £42m in 2010, according to researchers from the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine and York University. Medical tourists spent an estimated £219m on hotels, restaurants, shopping and transport in the UK. The researchers also found that more people leave the UK seeking medical treatment abroad than arrive in this country for care: about 63,000 people from the country travelled to hospitals and clinics abroad in 2010, while considerably fewer, about 52,000 people, came here. The research flies in the face of assertions by Jeremy Hunt, the health secretary, that the tourists cost the health service money. Denis Campbell and James Meikle report on a Care Quality Commission finding that staff at three-quarters of England's hospitals say patient safety is under threat where they work, raising fresh concern over the quality of care hospitals provide. There's also news that the government is urging people to use their heating this winter as part of its plan to prevent some of the thousands of avoidable deaths that occur each year due to the cold weather. Public Health England says there are too many avoidable deaths each winter, with just over 24,000 each year in England and Wales. Photograph: Steve Parsons/PA Elsewhere, the BBC reports that a Derbyshire NHS trust has been told by watchdog Monitor that it must take urgent action to fix its finances and waiting lists. If there's a story, report or event you'd like to highlight – or you would like to share your thoughts on any of the healthcare issues in the news today – you can get in touch by leaving a comment below the line or tweeting us at @GdnHealthcare.