President Barack Obama told reporters: 'As you may have heard, the site isn't working the way it's supposed to yet.' Photograph: Zuma/Rex Features President Barack Obama on Saturday used his weekly address to defend the healthcare.gov website at the heart of his signature healthcare reform, the Affordable Care Act. The $394m website, which facilitates the purchase of health insurance by members of the public, went live on 1 October but has suffered from a number of problems. This week website contractors endured a Congressional grilling and the administration announced a relaxation of penalties related to the 31 March deadline for members of the public to have signed up for health insurance. On Monday Obama was forced to defend the website rollout in a live press conference from the White House rose garden. On Saturday, employing something of an understatement, the president said: "As you may have heard, the site isn't working the way it's supposed to yet." In their official reply to the address, Republicans stayed on the attack. Representative Fred Upton, the chairman of the House energy and commerce committee which will question Obama's embattled health secretary, Kathleen Sebelius, next week, said: "Despite hundreds of millions of taxpayers dollars invested, the website still does not work for most." A number of Republicans have called for Sebelius's resignation. As healthcare.gov has struggled with glitches, delays and bugs, the Obama administration has weathered a week of stinging attacks from Republicans seeking to present a united front and capitalise on the issue after their failure to defund the reform, known as Obamacare, via the recent 16-day government shutdown. On Friday night, Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, one of the architects of the shutdown, spoke in Des Moines, Iowa. Addressing an annual Republican fundraising dinner, he said: "One of the things we accomplished in the fight over Obamacare is we elevated the national debate over what a disaster, what a train wreck, how much Obamacare is hurting millions of Americans across this country." On Saturday, the pollster Whit Ayres indicated Republican determination to hound the president further when he told the Associated Press: "There's no question the issue has legs, in part because it affects so many Americans very directly and in part because the glitches with the website are simply one of many fundamental problems with this law." Senator Ted Cruz spoke in Iowa on Friday night. Photograph: Jim Bourg/Reuters In his address, Obama sought to counter such opinions when he said: "It's … interesting to see Republicans in Congress expressing so much concern that people are having trouble buying health insurance through the new website – especially considering they've spent the last few years so obsessed with denying those same people access to health insurance that they just shut down the government and threatened default over it. "As I've said many times before, I'm willing to work with anyone, on any idea, who's actually willing to make this law perform better. But it's well past the time for folks to stop rooting for its failure." On Friday, the contractor appointed by the White House to fix the website, Jeffrey Zients, put a timetable on his mission when he said: "By the end of November, healthcare.gov will work smoothly for the vast majority of users. The healthcare.gov site is fixable. It will take a lot of work, and there are a lot of problems that need to be addressed." The website is supposed to make finding health insurance as simple as buying "a plane ticket on Kayak or a TV on Amazon". In his address, Obama said: "In the coming weeks, we are going to get it working as smoothly as it's supposed to. We've got people working overtime, 24/7, to boost capacity and address these problems, every single day." The president also outlined other ways for members of the public to purchase healthcare, including "over the phone, by mail, or in person with a specially trained navigator who can help answer your questions". In a sign of the damage done by the poor performance of the website, a former Obama administration official told Reuters that even if the website is fixed it will face scepticism from the general public. The former official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said: "I think that people are going to like the site and sign up for it. The problem is once a user has a bad experience at a website, they're not usually going to want to go back to it."