Though this should come as no surprise: based on the early returns on Obamacare enrollments, many of the predictions of failure, including those made by both Howard Dean and Warren Buffet back in 2010, are becoming reality. And it has nothing to do with website glitches. The glitches and problems with the website are actually, for the moment a blessing for Democrats and Obama himself. They serve as a temporary smoke screen to the real problems which will soon become evident and which were inherent in the law itself, a law for those not aware, that was primarily written by the insurance industry (see the PBS documentary on Frontline) after Obama gave in to their demands and dropped the public option. Obamacare won't be the signature accomplishment of his presidency as his supporters like to trumpet, but his signature failure. What was needed and what would have been real reform was the public healthcare option. Indeed, before her own capitulation to Obama and betrayal of her conscience, Nancy Pelosi called the public option "the centerpiece of healthcare reform". A public option had the votes in the Democratically-controlled Congress to pass, was backed by the American people in poll after poll by large majorities and would have given Americans the choice of leaving their insurance companies for a government run program similar to Medicare. Obamacare is just the opposite and is predicated on trying to force 32 million uninsured people to run to the insurance companies to purchase policies despite the fact that these same insurance companies were part of the problem in the first place. Remember that immediately after Obamacare passed the Senate, when Democratic Senator Tom Harkin (Iowa), a public option supporter, was asked how he felt about passing the bill his answer was "it's better than nothing ". If asked the same question today, he might not be so generous. What will soon be apparent once the glitches with the web sites are fixed is that Obamacare will not get remotely close to the 32 million needed to make the program work (or even the 7 million the government predicts will sign up by March 2014). And that will have nothing to do with the website, but what people see on the site once they get there. As Robert Frank pointed out in the business section of the New York Times, for Obamacare to succeed, millions of young, healthy uninsured people need to buy into the program and purchase insurance. All of them. One look at the proposed premiums for the bottom tier plans designed to attract those millions and anyone not blinded by wishful thinking could have seen that Obamacare was going to fail. The cost alone of these "low end" policies are producing sticker shock when people see them. It gets worse when people see what the insurance companies are actually offering for these premiums. That's when they get the second shock. Many uninsured are finding that the bronze or lowest end policies are being priced in the range of $250 a month and up on average and that they come with $6,000 yearly deductibles(pdf) to be paid out of pocket before they get full coverage. Until then, they pay 40% in co-pays until the $6,000 out-of-pocket is reached in addition to the monthly premiums. And again, this is for the bottom tier polices for a single person, not a family. Costs to a family are higher. It doesn't take Warren Buffet's financial savvy to figure out that young, healthy uninsured Americans, who are largely uninsured because they cant afford health insurance in the first place, are not going to be flocking to buy these policies for the privilege of having a health insurance card in their wallets that requires another $6,000 out-of-pocket before their expenses are fully covered and includes co-pays of 40% of all initial costs until that $6,000 is reached. What most of them will do is what they have been doing – live without insurance and go to an emergency room if they need medical care where the law says they have to be treated whether they have insurance or not. The returns so far on Obamacare bear this out and spell disaster. It's not about glitches on the website. The percentage of people who get to the site who are filling out applications is miniscule – as of this writing approximately 6m hits resulting in about 700,000 applications, or a little better than 10% of those visiting the site. And remember, applications are not enrollments, they are only people filling out a required general application before they are even able to see what's being offered and does not obligate an applicant to choose a plan. While the White House is so far refusing to release figures showing actual enrollments, (that will come in mid-November), the estimates are based on state run exchanges as well as data from Healthcare.gov and estimates from health insurance industry experts and companies processing enrollments. Based on the numbers and the need for all 32 million young healthy uninsured people to purchase policies for Obamacare to work, it's not going to work. Yes it's early, but not that early since enrollment has to occur before the end of December (now extended to end of March 2014) to avoid the $95 penalty for not having insurance, and so far the actual number of enrollments is about 0.01% of what is needed. A healthcare industry analyst has said that he believes that so far, most of those who are actually signing up are not the young, healthy target market, but older and sicker people and people signing up for expanded Medicaid. Based on what the insurance companies are charging for low end policies and what is being offered for the money, it's no wonder healthy young people who couldn't afford insurance in the first place are so far saying thanks but no thanks. There may be some anecdotal exceptions, but not enough to matter. One college student wrote that he purchased a policy for $70 a month, which included his government subsidy (that's still $840 a year for a college student working part time), but didn't say what he was getting for his money. And maybe he didn't check. Low end policies costing $250 a month and up are the average for single people making $40,000 a year and less. The policies can be higher or lower depending on where you live ($611 in New York City, $218 in parts of upstate Rochester NY, $337 in other parts of Rochester) on top of $6,000 deductibles, 40% co-pays and the best hospitals and doctors often not included in the policy's networks. It's everything one would have expected from the insurance companies who authored this debacle of a law and everything the public option which Obama dropped, was designed to fix and replace. Democrats are already starting to bail out with 10 in the senate calling for a delay in the deadline for enrollment and the $95 penalty for those who fail to enroll. But a delay isnt the answer. A real change is. Congressional Democrats should start getting out in front of what is going to be a mammoth failure, and start running on the idea of having supported a public option in the first place over Obamacare. They should promote the idea of a Democratic Congress in 2014 passing a public option to make this work. If that sounds like it's throwing Obama and Obamacare under the bus, it might be. But it's not like he doesn't deserve it and hasn't done the same to almost everyone else. Obama has said a number of times in response to the problems with Obamacare, "I'm willing to work with anyone, on any idea, who's actually willing to make this law perform better". The best way, maybe the only way to fix it is to do what Howard Dean said to do – junk it. And replace it with a public option.