Barack Obama's top healthcare official was facing a bruising day in front of a congressional committee on Wednesday as the administration faced pressure to explain its blundered launch of its healthcare reforms. Kathleen Sebelius, the secretary of Health and Human Services, is the second administration official to be forced in front of Congress to account for the failings of the healthcare.gov website. Republicans in the House of Representatives have ratcheted up their attacks on the stumbling launch of the Affordable Care Act. On Tuesday, Marilyn Tavenner, the head of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, admitted that the healthcare.gov website had "not worked as well as it should" and apologised for the series of problems that have kept Americans from signing up for healthcare coverage. She was repeatedly grilled over the botched rollout before the House ways and means committee, which pressed her in vain to say how many people had successfully signed up to an insurance plan through the website.“To the millions of Americans who’ve attempted to use healthcare.gov to shop and enroll in healthcare coverage, I want to apologize to you that the website has not worked as well as it should. We know how desperately you need affordable coverage," Tavenner said in her testimony to the committee. She said the website "can and will be fixed" and that her team were already seeing improvements with the service. But challenged by committee chairman Dave Camp, a Republican from Michigan, to provide the number of people who had been able enroll for health insurance, Tavenner said the government did not have the figures. "We will have those numbers available in mid-November," Tavenner said repeatedly. A memo leaked to the Associated Press and published on 16 October showed that the Obama administration hoped that 494,620 people would have enrolled for health insurance under the program by the end of the month. The memo, prepared for Sebelius, predicted that enrolment would reach 3.3 million nationally by 31 December. The White House aims to have 7 million people enrolled in healthcare by 31 March 2014. The administration has released various statistics on the numbers of people visiting the website, opening accounts and having their income verified by the Internal Revenue Service, but is yet to say how many have successfully signed up. In a prepared statement for the House energy and commerce committee, Sebelius, who is facing calls to step down or be fired, acknowledged the experience of healthcare.gov was "frustrating". While 700,000 applications had been submitted, many had trouble creating accounts, she said."The initial consumer experience of healthcare.gov has not lived up to the expectations of the American people and is not acceptable. We are committed to fixing these problems as soon as possible." The testimony by Obama's officials comes against the backdrop over another controversy, this time over the wave of cancellation notices hitting small businesses and individuals who buy their own insurance. Republicans say that contradicts one of Obama's earliest promises about the healthcare law, that those who have their own plans can keep them if they like them.  On Monday it emerged that the Obama administration knew that millions of Americans would not be able to remain on their own health insurance plans as their policies do not meet the standard mandated by the Obamacare law. Obama was traveling to Boston on Wednesday where he planned to speak about the embattled law from Boston's historic Faneuil Hall, where Massachusetts Republican governor Mitt Romney was joined by the late Democratic senator Ted Kennedy to sign the state's 2006 healthcare overhaul bill, a model for Obamacare. Obama was pointing to the bipartisan effort to get the program launched in Massachusetts to encourage his opponents to stop rooting for his law's failure. After Massachusetts passed its landmark law in 2006, few people signed up at first – most waited for the deadlines to finalise their coverage decisions. Today, the law remains popular. "Imagine the stories that were probably generated at the time about how the whole thing was going to fail when, in fact, the opposite turned out to be true," White House press secretary Jay Carney said on Tuesday. The Associated Press contributed to this report.