8.44am ET Good morning, this is Jim Newell in Washington. Today we'll be covering a House committee hearing featuring Health and Human Services secretary Kathleen Sebelius, who will face her first grilling since the rollout of the "glitchy" healthcare.gov national health insurance exchanges website. Sebelius will appear before the powerful House energy and commerce committee, whose members are very much looking forward to grilling her about a broken government website. Here is how Sebelius described the overall status of the website in the witness testimony she submitted to the committee prior to today's hearing: Over the past few weeks, millions of Americans have visited HealthCare.gov to look at their new health coverage options under the Affordable Care Act. In that time, nearly 700,000 applications have been submitted to the Federal and state marketplaces from across the Nation. This tremendous interest – with over 20 million unique visits to date to HealthCare.gov – confirms that the American people are looking for quality, affordable health coverage. Unfortunately, the experience on HealthCare.gov has been frustrating for many Americans. Some have had trouble creating accounts and logging in to the site, while others have received confusing error messages, or had to wait for slow page loads or forms that failed to respond in a timely fashion. The initial consumer experience of HealthCare.gov has not lived up to the expectations of the American people and is not acceptable. We are committed to fixing these problems as soon as possible.  Some questioners will simply ask for more specifics about when and how the website will get fixed. Other, more scandal-seeking representatives, however, will want to know why they didn't test the website properly before launching it, who knew what, and when, and what this broken website portends for the great liberal project. Sebelius' appearance before the House committee comes one day after Marilyn Tavenner, head of the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services – the agency charged with contracting out the construction of HealthCare.gov – testified before the House ways and means committee. Tavenner, at least, offered an apology: "To the millions of Americans who’ve attempted to use HealthCare.gov to shop and enroll in healthcare coverage, I want to apologize to you that the website has not worked as well as it should. We know how desperately you need affordable coverage.” The hearing is scheduled to begin at 9am ET.