The most senior healthcare official in the Obama administration apologised for the botched rollout of the new federal health insurance website on Wednesday and admitted that she was wrong when she told the president that the system was ready to be launched. Kathleen Sebelius, the health and human services secretary, sought to defuse anger of the launch of the website with the most effusive apology yet from the administration, describing the problems that have beset the system as "miserably frustrating”. Appearing before the House energy and commerce committee on Tuesday, Sebelius said: “I am as frustrated and angry as anyone with the flawed launch of healthcare.gov.  “You deserve better. I apologise. I’m accountable to you for fixing these problems, and I’m committed to earning your confidence back by fixing the site.” Early software problems have been compounded in recent days with network outages, but Sebelius re-iterated a pledge to have all problems ironed out by the end of November. “The only way we can restore confidence that we can get it right, is to get it right,” she said, revealing that the government had already spent $118m building the site and $56m on associated IT costs. Sebelius also ducked responsibility for changes that triggered the website meltdown, blaming government administrator Marilyn Tavenner, who testified to another House committee on Tuesday, for a last-minute decision to force users of the website to register in advance. Sebelius said she told Obama that the system would be ready on 1 October. "Clearly, I was wrong," she said. She spoke hours before Obama said he was "not happy" with the rollout and himself took "full responsibility" for resolving the problems with the rollout.  The president spoke from Boston, where he hoped the highlight benefits of the Massachusetts healthcare law that served as a model for the federal plan. He condeded the launch of the federal healthcare programme had been troubled, but sought to highlight early problems with the Massachusetts law that were eventually ironed out.  "All the parade of horribles, the worst predictions about health care reform in Massachusetts never came true," he said. "They're the same arguments that you're hearing now." At the hearing, fury over the botched rollout made way for more political scrutiny of its winners and losers, leaving Sebelius unruffled by a four-hour showdown. Before the grilling, Sebelius had come under pressure to quit, but on Wednesday a majority of Republican lawmakers choose to use their time to question the substance of the new law instead. The tone of the hearing was set by the opening question from from Republican chairman Fred Upton, who choose to focus on a subset of existing insurance customers who, he claimed, are facing prices rises of up to 400% as a result of the Affordable Care Act. “These increases are a heavy burden on our constituents,” added Phil Gingrey of Georgia, who pressed Sebelius for more detail on how those facing financial hardship will avoid government penalties for failing to sign up. Such arguments have surrounded the act, known as Obamacare, since it was first mooted in the president's first term, and have divided Republicans and Democrats. But Sebelius largely shrugged off the criticism by pointing to the millions of uninsured Americans who are expected to benefit from the exchanges. Sebelius also ducked a series of fierce attacks over whether Obama had lied by claiming that people would be able to keep their existing plans if they wanted to, saying the policy to cut off insurance taken out after the law was signed had always been an exception. “There was no change," she told Upton. "The regulation involving grandfathered plans, which applied to the employer market and the individual market, indicated that if a plan was in effect in March of 2010, stayed in effect without unduly burdening the consumer with reducing benefits and adding on huge costs, that plan would stay in effect and never have to comply with any regulations of the Affordable Care Act." Republicans then launched a series of attacks on other aspects of the roll-out, ranging from abortion provision to security and privacy concerns. Mike Rogers of Michigan, who also chairs the intelligence committee, criticised a decision to add new software improvements to the website while it was still running, or “hot-swapping code”, which he said exposed users to the potentially insecure updates. Congressman John Shimkus also returned to a familiar criticism of conservatives, asking if insurance customers could choose to avoid plans that offered to pay for abortion costs. Though at times showing a shaky grasp of the detail, Sebelius largely withstood the splintered Republican attack, choosing to apologise for details, such as “legal boilerplate” notices on privacy or failures to conduct testing, but defending the overall system. It was clear on Wednesday that pressure on the administration was likely to continue, as it was revealed that a major contractor involved in building the website told the government last month it did not have enough time to test its product. CGI Federal also told the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services in a memo that it could not get access to computer logs that would have pinpointed potential problems. The contractor described that issue as "severe" as recently as June, and said a compressed schedule for opening the site on 1 October did not allow enough time for adequate testing. The House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform asked CGI Federal for the documents last week. It released them to the public late Tuesday. As Sebelius testified before the House committee, Obama was traveling to Boston where planned to speak about the embattled law Wednesday from Boston's historic Faneuil Hall, where in 2006 Mitt Romney and Ted Kennedy signed Massachusetts' health care overhaul bill, a model for Obamacare. Obama was pointing to the bipartisan effort to get the program launched in Massachusetts to encourage his opponents to stop rooting for his law's failure.