5.35pm ET We've predicted that the president would win the public relations war against Congress over who catches blame for the sequester and budget-related agitas to follow. Our own Harry J. Enten, whom we dislike to disagree with, has disagreed with us. In a story last week under the headline "Obama is about to lose the PR battle on the sequester," Harry wrote: Obama hopes that the public will force congress's hand by dint of their unpopularity, but Republicans seem content to muddle the field enough so that neither side holds a public relations edge. I think the Republicans are right, even though the president may have the power to turn it around. Among other data, Harry pointed to presidential approval numbers, which he found to be more downwardly flexible than Congress' numbers. Now a McClatchy-Marist poll seems to bolster Harry's view, finding Obama at his lowest approval rating since November 2011: [Obama] is still vastly more popular than Congress, particularly congressional Republicans. But in the biggest political clash of the year – over the federal budget and how to curb deficits – voters split 44 percent to 42 percent between preferring Congress or Obama. [...] The national survey, conducted four months after Obama was re-elected with 51 percent of the popular vote, found 45 percent of voters approving of the way he’s handling his job and 48 percent disapproving. That was down from a 50 percent approval rating in November and December, and the lowest since November 2011. It also was the first time that more people disapproved of his work than approved since November 2011, when his rating was 43-50. Ron Fournier, whose column caused such a stir at today's White House briefing, argues that the drop in Obama's numbers was foreseeable: This was predictable. The White House was warned by Democratic allies in Congress and on K Street that, fair or not, voters ultimately punish presidents for malfeasance in Washington. Even more jarring than Obama's lack of engagement was his public protestations that there was nothing he could do to strike a deal with the GOP. “It made him look weak,” said a Democratic strategist with close ties to the White House. “It made him look – can I used this word? – impotent.” On the other hand, there's this from Gallup yesterday: "Congress Approval Stagnant at Low Level." The current 13% reading, based on interviewing conducted March 7-10, is just a few percentage points above the all-time low of 10% reached twice last year.