Senator Jim DeMint left Congress in January 2013 to lead the Heritage Foundation. Photograph: Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images Years ago, it would have been hard to imagine that leaving the US Senate to take over a policy thinktank and turn it political would have equated to a smart career move. But just last year, former Senator Jim DeMint did. DeMint – now the head of the Heritage Foundation – would have never be described as a moderate during his days on Capitol Hill, and it doesn't seem to matter much now. Instead, he's turned Heritage into, as some, like former Congressman and Heritage trustee Mickey Edwards, fear, "just another advocacy or lobbying group for the far right" – and in doing so, his influence has grown. DeMint's story also lends insight into an aspect of why partisan gridlock is so front and center in Washington these days. Lawmakers – always wary of getting voted out in the next election – have an eye on their post-office opportunities. But because of how those opportunities are changing, legislators have less incentive to compromise. As the fierce unwillingness to compromise by a small, but significant faction of legislators forced a government shutdown and pushed the country to the brink of default, commentators touched on the usual factors connected to Ccngressional dysfunction. Before one ever gets to Washington, many of the House districts are already safe, with locked-in majorities. Once elected, many face fear of a primary challenger and have to protect their flank by taking more extreme positions, instead of moving to the middle. And there's also the common refrain that no one spends time in Washington anymore; there's not enough socializing – all leading to a lack of trust across the aisle. These are all true – but missing from the list is this: the post-office opportunity landscape has changed as well, and that has provided lawmakers all the more incentive to play partisan firebrand while in Congress, rather than playing the compromiser. Let's face it, Congress never has been perfect, but in the past, there was more willingness to compromise and work across the aisle. And that boded well for lucrative opportunities once off the Hill. Former Democratic Senate majority leader George Mitchell's reputation as a statesman while in office was certainly seen as an asset when President Clinton appointed him as special envoy to the Northern Ireland peace process in 1995. So, also, even some who wouldn't necessarily have been called statesmanlike, such as former House Republican Vin Weber, learned the value of compromise during their tenure on the Hill, and it also served them well afterwards. Weber, who is now a successful lobbyist in part because of the relationships he built on the Hill, suggested in a 2011 New York Times Magazine article that in order to be effective in Congress: You can't just stand there and take a stand and say, "I'm not going to compromise on my position." Because you won't achieve anything. As political advocacy and punditry become promising opportunities for former members of Congress, though, compromise becomes less attractive. With a new media environment that provides platforms from which to quickly voice opinions to an audience that already agrees with you, catering to the extreme becomes an easy way to do so. Being a show pony may not win you friends, but it will get you press. It's less about achieving legislative success and more about making your point. In the Senate, DeMint was known more for pushing his ideological stances than for ushering through lawmaking initiatives. In fact, he was mainly known for his political action committee that backed conservative candidates in Senate primaries. Now, as the head of Heritage, DeMint himself has said: There's no question in my mind that I have more influence now on public policy than I did as an individual senator. That influence was on display this past summer. Although DeMint personally is prohibited from lobbying his former colleagues for two years, Heritage's lobbying arm spent $550,000 to target 100 House Republicans who had not signed a letter urging House Speaker John Boehner to defund Obamacare – a letter that ultimately spurred the Boehner to change course and support the effort, which led to the government shutdown. There is also the legacy DeMint left behind on Capitol Hill. As his colleagues noted, there are "still plenty of junior lawmakers who are willing to use the guerilla tactics that DeMint employed frequently in recent years." So, it's not so surprising, then, to see Senator Ted Cruz and his allies acting like "wacko birds" and shutting down the government – even if as many as 140,000 of his Texas constituents were temporarily put out of work and, according to an anonymous Republican senator: It was very evident to everyone in the room that Cruz doesn't have a strategy – he never had a strategy, and could never answer a question about what the endgame was. While being a C-Span reality star may clash with the image of statesman, Cruz boosted his profile among his partisan base, which can enhance his prospects in that realm going forward. The big question from all of this is whether the show ponies have staying power. Already, some groups, upset with the stands taken by Cruz and his compatriots, have threatened to fund more moderate candidates. And voters – 91% of who disapprove of Congress' performance – could be spurred by recent partisan jockeying to back more congenial, collaboration-minded representatives. Furthermore, the fallout from the government shutdown has also led to concerns that Heritage's cachet may not be what it used to. As Republican Senator Orrin Hatch of Utah observed: There's a real question in the minds of many Republicans now, and I'm not just speaking for myself but for a lot of people: is Heritage going to go so political that it really doesn't amount to anything anymore? It remains to be seen whether Heritage will have the same pull in a future budget debate or how other thinktanks will evaluate their images as a result. But as long as extreme partisanship is profitable after serving in office, there are going to be those that embrace it while in office. Just how attractive an option it is in the long run will determine whether #DeMinting is a trend or a mainstay.