President Barack Obama has repeated his call to end 'manufactured crises' in Washington. Photograph: Rex President Barack Obama on Saturday used his weekly address to appeal for progress in Congressional budget talks, rather than to discuss the ongoing controversy over the implementation of his signature healthcare reform, known as Obamacare. In the Republican response to the president's address, Senator Dan Coates of Indiana concentrated on the healthcare issue, criticising the performance of the central Obamacare website, healthcare.gov, and insurance cancellation notices. Coates said the healthcare law could not be fixed and Americans should start over. Later in the day, in another embarrassing development for the administration, it was announced that the healthcare.gov website would be down for "extended maintenance" between 9pm ET on Saturday and 9am ET on Sunday. Seeking to repair the damage done to their standing in public polls by last month's 16-day government shutdown and subsequent infighting within their party, senior Republicans have focused fire on Obamacare as the reform has endured a troubled rollout. On Friday, the administration was forced to answer reports that only six people had managed to enrol for healthcare through the federal website on its first day of operation, and that relatively few people had been able to successfully enrol since. In his address, Obama referred obliguely to the battle over the Affordable Care Act, which was behind the shutdown and the concurrent flirtation with failing to raise the US debt ceiling, when he said politicians in Washington needed to end "what has done more than anything else to undermine our economy over the past few years … the constant cycle of manufactured crises and self-inflicted wounds". He went on to decry the "obsession with cutting just for the sake of cutting", although he did not name the Republicans in connection with it. Representative Paul Ryan, the Republican chair of the House budget committee, and Senator Patty Murray, the Democratic chair of its Senate equivalent, are engaged in a conference aimed at producing a budget acceptable to both sides of the political divide. They have until 13 December to produce a budget that would need to pass Congress by mid-January in order to avoid another government shutdown in the fiscal year which runs to September 2014. On Wednesday, the Republican Senator Rob Portman gave voice to general expectations in Washington when he told Ryan and Murray's committee, which is made up of 29 members of the House and Senate: "I don't think we're going to do a grand bargain here. I'd like to – I think a lot of us would. But we can do something for the American people. We can call it a good bargain." House budget committee chairman Paul Ryan. Photo: Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images In his address on Saturday, Obama outlined his hopes for the budget conference. He said: "We can keep wasteful corporate tax giveaways that working folks don't get – or we could close those loopholes and use that money to pay for things that actually create jobs. We can keep harmful cuts to education programmes – or we could give more kids a head start, hire more teachers in math and science, and help more kids afford a college education. "We can keep doling out corporate welfare to big oil companies – or we could keep investing in the renewable energy that creates jobs and lowers our carbon pollution." Citing his "top priority as president", which he defined as "growing our economy, creating good jobs [and] strengthening security and opportunity for the middle class", Obama took a slightly unusual line when he said: "I know that what you often hear out of Washington can sound like Charlie Brown's teacher – a jumble of unfocused noise that's out of touch with the things you care about. "So today, I want to cut through that noise and talk plainly about what we should do right now to keep growing this economy and creating new jobs." The president added: "Here's the bottom line. Congress should pass a budget that cuts things we don't need, and closes wasteful tax loopholes that don't help create jobs, so that we can free up resources for the things that actually do create jobs and growth. So the question isn't between growth and fiscal responsibility. We need both."