Mitt Romney appeared on NBC's Meet the Press. Photograph: Michael Conroy/AP Mitt Romney, the losing candidate in the 2012 presidential election, on Sunday led the continuing Republican attack on President Barack Obama and his signature healthcare reforms. In a rare interview, with NBC's Meet the Press, Romney said the Affordable Care Act, and the immediately troubled rollout of its federal exchange website, had "undermined the president's credibility in the hearts of the American people". Repeating a line of attack pursued earlier on CNN by Senator Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire, Romney – who as governor of Massachusetts in 2006 signed a precursor of "Obamacare" into law – repeatedly criticised the president for statements to the effect that no Americans would lose existing insurance plans under his reform if they did not want to. "Perhaps the most important lesson the president failed to learn", Romney said, "was you have to tell the American people the truth. And when he told the American people that you could keep your health insurance if you wanted to keep it, period – he said that time and again – he wasn't telling the truth. I think that fundamental dishonesty has really imperilled the whole foundation of his second term." Romney added: "It was NBC News who said there are six million people who are going to lose their insurance. That's not some little number, that's six million American people. "I think the key thing that the president is trying to get away from is that he told people they could keep their insurance and that was not the truth. And whether you like the model of Obamacare or not, the fact that the president sold it on the basis of a statement that was not true has undermined the foundation of his second term. I think it's rotting it away." Questioned about the similarities between the healthcare reform which he signed into law and Obamacare, Romney repeatedly defended the Massachusetts legislation for having been implemented at state level, rather than federal, and advocated state-by-state reform. Asked what the president could have learned from Massachussetts regarding people losing insurance plans when they did not want to, Romney said: "He could have learned it by looking at Massachusetts and seeing people there lost their insurance. He could have told the people the truth and he didn't." The current governor of Massachusetts, Democrat Deval Patrick, appeared on the same programme. Asked about Obama's promise that no one would lose their insurance plan if they did not want to, he said: "For 95% of the people in America, that is the truth. For the small number of people who have a healthcare plan which in fact will not insure them when they get sick, it is not true. "That's the whole point – if you have a pre-existing condition, if you have a plan which disappears when you need it most, the Affordable Care Act says that has to end. Medical costs are the number one cause of bankruptcy in America – that ends under Affordable Care." Deval Patrick succeeded Romney as governor of Massachusetts in 2006. Photograph: Chitose Suzuki/AP Senator Dianne Feinstein, a California Democrat interviewed on CBS's Face the Nation, primarily about issues pertaining to the National Security Agency's surveillance programmes, acknowledged severe problems in the rollout of Obamacare but said it would be a "very positive thing" if the reform got up and running. "The big problem here is there are so many destroyers – in the house, in the public, in the private healthcare sector – that just want to destroy," she said. "And that's not helpful." Mike Rogers, the Republican chair of the House intelligence committee, told the same programme the White House was paying the price of not properly testing the online exchange. "They're trying to change the tire on a car going at 75mph on the expressway," he said. Ayotte appeared on CNN's State of the Union. After discussing her continued campaigning interest in the administration's response to the attack on the US consulate in Benghazi, Libya, on 11 September 2012, she answered questions on Obamacare and the troubled rollout of healthcare.gov. "This is a mess," Ayotte said. "It's much deeper than the website, including many Americans who are getting cancellation notices, including stories I've heard from people in New Hampshire of rising premium costs. My constituents are writing me, but how can I help them when it's a situation of them getting cancellation notices because of the way Obamacare is drafted? They can't access the website because it's such a mess." It was reported this week that only six Americans had been able to enroll for new healthcare insurance on the first day of the federal website's operation, 1 October, and that disappointingly small numbers of people had subsequently been able to enroll. The health secretary, Kathleen Sebelius, endured a difficult appearance before a congressional committee and the website was taken down overnight on Saturday, for "extended maintenance", after Obama had avoided the subject in his weekly address, instead discussing the need for Congress to agree a budget. The Republican answering address focused entirely on Obamacare. Romney and Ayotte both struck a relatively conciliatory tone when discussing how they would deal with the difficulties experienced under Obamacare. Both distanced themselves from the extreme opposition, expressed most forcibly by the likes of Senator Ted Cruz, which drove the recent 16-day government shutdown and did extensive damage to the Republicans' standing in public polls, driving the party's approval rating as low as 22%. Ayotte said: "I was one of the Republicans who called out members of my own party on the shutdown strategy against Obamacare, because I didn't think it was effective or good for the country. I'm calling on the president now to call a timeout on this. Convene a group of bipartisan leaders to address healthcare concerns in this country because this is not working. Let's do this right, as opposed to the way this was passed in the first instance." Romney, who also said he had not supported the policy which led to the government shutdown, said: "I think the only way [Obama] can rebuild credibility is to work with Republicans and Democrats and try to rebuild the foundation [of his second term]. We've got to have a president who can lead and right now he's not able to do so."