11.10pm ET The Guardian's Adam Gabbatt (@AdamGabbatt) reports on NYC mayor-elect Bill de Blasio's victory speech. Here's Adam: Just after 10.30pm the hundreds-strong crowd in Brooklyn's Park Slope got their first glimpse of the man they had all been waiting for. Out walked the star of the campaign – Dante De Blasio, the 15-year-old son of Bill whose advertisement appearances and sizable afro have made him the face of this election. De Blasio's daughter, Chiara, and wife, Chirlane McCray, were there too, and it was McCray who offered the introduction. “The man I love has exactly what it takes to take on the big challenges we face,” McCray said, as the crowd finally quietened down. McCray had worked with De Blasio on the campaign of New York's last Democratic mayor, David Dinkins– and now she was introducing the next. De Blasio waved down the cheers and thanked his wife and staff. “We're proud of what we've accomplished on this campaign and we're humbled by it,” he said, before getting down to business in a speech that sought to temper expectations that were sky-high after De Blasio's repeated campaign pledges to united New York's “two cities” – those of the haves and have-nots. “Let me be clear, our work, all of our work, is really just beginning,” he said. “We have no illusions about the task that lies ahead. Tackling inequality isn't easy. It never has been and it never will be. The challenges we face have been decades in the making, and the problems we sought to address will not be solved overnight. But make no mistake, the city has chosen a progressive path and tonight we set forward together on it, together as one city.” De Blasio went on to praise his family, who have been so central to his campaign. His children came in for special praise. "They make me proud every single day. And my fellow New Yorkers, they are very stylish," he said, to cheers. There was mention of New York's controversial stop-and-frisk policing in the speech – something that had served as a divisive issue between he and Lhota on the campaign. Safety and civil liberties “are not mutually exclusive”, De Blasio said, adding that there needs to be communication between police and the neighbourhoods they serve. “We are stronger and safer as a city when police and residents work hand in hand.” De Blasio signed off with more realism before this self-confessed “night owl” left to enjoy his victory. “The road ahead will be difficult but it will be travelled. Progressive changes wont happen overnight but they will happen. There will be many obstacles that stand in our way but we will overcome them. And I know this. I will never stop fighting for the city I love, the city we all love so much and I will never forget that as mayor I work for you.” – Adam Gabbatt