'Rambling, offensive, arrogant mess' … a fan takes to social media to criticise comic Reginald D Hunter This week's comedy news A masterclass in defusing a potentially ugly row about your standup comedy. Just kidding. After his show in Aberystwyth last Thursday, Reginald D Hunter was confronted on Facebook by an audience member who accused him of revelling in "misogyny and violence". Jo Cooper, a woodlands project manager from Machynlleth, claimed to have walked out of the gig, which she called a "rambling, offensive, arrogant mess". Not a man to take criticism lying down, the comedian wrote: "I am pleased that my performance hurt you last night. You, and the rest of the bitches of your ilk… the ones who never want to solve issues, just have them, the ones who destructively presume to speak for all of femininity, but only do for a few … tell them that I am coming to intellectually and emotionally mutilate their collective, dumb, divisive asses, too." Cooper later told the Cambrian News that fans of Hunter had levelled dozens of death threats at her. A debate on the comedian's response to the incident rages on the star's Facebook page. Stop press: Russell Brand has responded to Robert Webb's response to Russell Brand. Speaking at a Huffington Post event on Monday, our would-be saviour returned fire after Webb criticised the political opinions Brand advanced in a New Statesman essay a fortnight ago. Webb accused Brand of romanticising violence and of risking the further disenfranchisement of young people by urging them not to vote. "Just for the record," Brand now tells us, "I'm not in on the old death camps … I'm double, double against genocide." Brand went on to suggest that Peep Show star Webb didn't understand the lives of people less fortunate than him. "If you went to Oxbridge, if you went to a private school, no one is coming for your kids," he told his audience. "I didn't have an education like Robert Webb had. But there are people from Leicester in Guantánamo Bay. [Whereas] it's okay for Robert Webb; no one is going to take his kids away." Given the quality of this cut and thrust, how can John Cleese possibly say that comedy's golden age is long gone? Alas, that's what the Fawlty Towers star tells us this week, courtesy of the Daily Telegraph. "We had a golden age of comedy from about the mid-50s that went through for the next 35 years or so," says Cleese, "and I think it was absolutely wonderful, starting with The Goon Show. I just don't think it's as good at the moment." His argument was only slightly undermined when Cleese admitted that he doesn't actually watch any contemporary comedy. "Almost everyone I speak to says there's little good comedy on television, and I'm not about to sit around for hours trying to disprove them." In other comedy news, Sacha Baron Cohen has announced a new film project that will see him play an extremist football hooligan. The Daily Mirror reports that the Ali G star has been in the north of England researching the new character, who – like Borat and Bruno before him – will star in a faux-documentary film. Star Wars star Carrie Fisher has joined the cast of Aussie comedian Jim Jefferies' US sitcom, Legit; and Tina Fey is creating a new comedy about a woman who escapes a doomsday cult. New pilots are being created for ventriloquist Nina Conti and comedian and Last Leg host Adam Hills, and Flight of the Conchords star Bret McKenzie is working on a new animated sitcom about Nasa. Best of the Guardian's comedy coverage • "I'm the coolest person on TV? OK, I'll take that!" – Zawe Ashton discusses her role in student sitcom Fresh Meat • "What a thrilling turn for the epistolary public life has taken!" Lost in Showbiz addresses the spate of open letters exchanged by eminent comedians • "Does that word have a rude origin?" – Isy Suttie and co discuss "pilots for pilots" at the launch of Channel 4's new burst of Blaps • "I was almost proud to be insulted on such a baroque scale," which is just as well, because the insults fly below the line as David Baddiel is interviewed for G2's Portrait of the Artist • Why comedy has a place in global development – readers argue that "comedy from non-western countries humanises the subjects of development in a way that nothing else does" • "It's arrogance, the idea that the world could heal itself by thinking like Brand" – columnist Deborah Orr joins in the great Russell debate (The other) controversy of the week Reading on mobile? Click here to view video Jon Stewart, the host of US satirical talkshow The Daily Show, has criticised the media for hijacking his jokes to attack the Obama administration. A segment on the show found Stewart, backed by a choir, singing "go fuck yourselves" to pundits, who had co-opted Stewart's gags about President Barack Obama's troubled healthcare legislation. "Don't you use our jokes as evidence that the thing you hate must be stopped," Stewart went on, "because I'm sure when we joke about shit you like, you're more than happy to ignore it." The row began when Stewart joked in a recent show about the faltering efforts, which include a malfunctioning website, to implement so-called Obamacare. "Democrats," he said, "can't spin this turd." Right wing commentators used this routine, from a comic perceived as left-leaning, as proof that the policy – and the Democrats – were in hot water. "When Jon Stewart and Saturday Night Live are making fun of the job you are doing," a US senator told Fox News, it tells you that "young Americans are laughing at the secretary and the website." But last Thursday, Stewart hit back. "Making fun of something [is] nothing new for us, so don't act like us making jokes about a certain programme or president is evidence that that politician or issue has reached some kind of tipping point for action," the performer said – citing as an example the fact that former president George Bush never resigned, despite constant mockery on TV. Best of our readers' comments In this week's Comedy Gold column, Leo Benedictus turned his attention to Daniel Kitson, the cult hero and conscience of UK standup – or, "British comedy's foremost tortured artist," as Leo styled him. In the piece, Kitson's "professional ethics" – that is, his refusal to play the media game – were discussed alongside his comedy, prompting this response from Buckley01: I've often wondered why so many journalists seem to feel the need to write about Daniel Kitson's "ethics" and stance towards journalists and the media as if it's noteworthy. It seems strange to me that the choice not to give interviews or to go on television is seen as "obnoxious" … Perhaps the fact that Kitson sells out his shows internationally without a marketing and media machine puts forward a model that journalists are uncomfortable to accept? … I don't see articles constantly questioning why every other "successful" comedian follows an almost identikit approach to their careers – circuit, corporate gigs, radio panel show, TV panel show, sitcom, arena, comeback tour, death. Not that I criticise this, [it] too is just a choice. But this model relies heavily on media attention and as such doesn't much get kicked. DEE5858 proposed this reason for Kitson's media phobia: I think, like most artists, it's an effort to protect what is very precious. It's like creating a vase and presenting it in a glass case, it's like the ropes that are placed around a historic artefact. The work is fragile … There are some people in the world that just don't get [Kitson's] stuff. I once heard a recording of It's the Fireworks Talking and, right at the very, very end, at the most touching part of the show, someone in the audience shouts out "gay", and totally kills the whole show, ruins it for everyone. And who ends up the most heartbroken? Of course it is Daniel Kitson, who has created that moment, whose memories and feelings are so exposed, who put heart and soul and all his energy into creating something beautiful. I could feel his stomach turn in anger and heartbreak, and my own turned for him. I don't think it is a ploy, I don't think it's anything to do with getting attention. I think he sees the beautiful, he makes a gift out of it, and he wants to protect it and give it to someone who will appreciate it. Reginald D Hunter might describe himself in much the same terms …