Software engineers are daily applying patches to the country's new healthcare website in an effort to work through a list of hundreds of fixes needed to get the site performing optimally, health and human services secretary Kathleen Sebelius told senators on Wednesday. "We are into the list, [but] we are not where we need to be,” Sebelius said. “It's a pretty aggressive schedule." In a technically apologetic but tonally defiant appearance before the Senate finance committee, Sebelius described a fevered behind-the-scenes effort to fix healthcare.gov while fighting off Republican calls for a further delay in the implementation of the president's health care law. "Delaying the Affordable Care Act wouldn't delay people's cancer or diabetes or Parkinson's," Sebelius said. "Delaying the Affordable Care Act doesn't delay the foreclosure notices for families forced into bankruptcy by unaffordable medical bills. ... For millions of Americans, delay is not an option. Too many lives depend on this." The health secretary faced sometimes harsh questioning from Republicans and more than one outright call for her resignation for problems with the site and the law. “It's impossible to do something in this administration that gets you fired,” said John Cornyn, Republican of Texas. “You can lie to the American people ... it's impossible.” Republicans were particularly critical of President Obama's promise, before the health care law was passed, that people could keep insurance plans they liked. The promise has been revealed as hollow through weeks of reports of insurers canceling hundreds of thousands of individual insurance policies. "It's not a true statement, it never was a true statement," said senator John Thune, Republican of South Dakota. "I think it's a tragedy that the American people bought into this, and that you all knew full well that it wasn't the case." When the president said people could keep their plans, Sebelius replied, he was referring to plans covered by the law's grandfather clause – not all plans. "It is not unusual to not have the same policy or the same practice a year later" in the individual health insurance market, she said. She said canceled plans were likely to have offered incomplete coverage. Republicans also raised concerns that security flaws in the signup process would leave consumers vulnerable to identity theft. Cornyn, the minority whip, said that workers hired by the government to help consumers sign up for new coverage, known as navigators, were not required to undergo federal background checks. He asked Sebelius whether "a convicted felon" might not therefore be hired as an Obamacare navigator. "That is possible," Sebelius said. But she said that no personal health information was transacted as part of the signup process, and that navigators were subject to considerable screening. "We did write the requirements that very much mirror what many states have in place for licensed insurance agents," she said. Sebelius prior to testifying before the House Energy and Commerce Committee hearing on the Affordable Care Act's implementation on 30 October. Photograph: J Scott Applewhite/AP As she downplayed turbulence in the marketplace as a result of the law, Sebelius said signing up for insurance was getting easier on the government website, and she described how technicians were rushing to meet a deadline to eliminate site bugs by the end of November. There are "a couple of hundred functional fixes that have been identified, and they are in a priority grouping," Sebelius said. She described a daily cycle of new computer programming and decisions about maintenance. At about "5 or 6pm" each evening, Sebelius said, engineers decided whether "testing for a coding fix can be applied that night." Asked when the system managers planned to test the repaired site “end-to-end,” Sebelius replied that, in effect, the site is being tested constantly by people using it to sign up for insurance. "It is end-to-end, daily," she said. "People are coming into the system and going through every day." She said the system was now able to process "17,000 registrants an hour with almost no errors.” "We will have enrollment numbers out next week," she said. As Sebelius testified, the Obama administration faced new questions about whether it had ignored warnings from as early as 2010 that management problems threatened the viability of the Affordable Care Act. Earlier this week the Washington Post published a memo written in 2010 by David Cutler, a Harvard health economist and a member of Obama's 2008 transition team. Addressed to the president's top economic advisers, the memo warned that "the personnel and processes you have in place are not up to the task." The memo singles out for criticism the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, the agency that oversaw the construction of healthcare.gov. "You were dealt a bad hand here," Cutler wrote. "The agency is demoralized, the best people have left, IT services are antiquated, and there are fewer employees than in 1981, despite a much larger burden ... Unfortunately, the senior staff at CMS ... is not up to the task." Sebelius acknowledged Wednesday that "the rollout has been excruciatingly awful for way too many people," but she said that given more time, implementation would work. "We are making progress," she said.