Obama spent the first anniversary of his re-election reassuring anxious Democrats that his struggling healthcare reforms were not becoming an electoral liability on Wednesday, a day after exit polls showed it may have helped Republicans close the gap in the Virginia gubernatorial race. A previously unannounced White House meeting with 14 senators who are facing re-election next year ran nearly an hour late on Wednesday after the president was pressed by some present to delay aspects of the Affordable Care Act. Senator Michael Bennet, who is heading Democrat efforts to retain control of the Senate in the 2014 midterm election, was then seen continuing a heated conversation with Obama before joining him on Air Force One for a fundraising trip to Dallas. Republican strategists claim that the botched launch of the Healthcare.gov was a factor in a last-minute resurgence of the conservative Ken Cuccinelli in the race for Virginia governor and will prove a growing factor in future. Election day takeaway? #ObamaCare a disaster for Democrats in '14. http://t.co/nWjQYWm4i1— Brad Dayspring (@BDayspring) November 6, 2013 Cuccinelli, who campaigned heavily as an opponent of Obamacare, lost by a narrower-than-expected margin on Tuesday and cited exit polls showing a majority of Virginian's oppose the Affordable Care Act. All of the senators invited to the impromptu White House meeting are up for re-election next year, many in swing states like Virginia, and several issued angry statements decrying the handling of the Obamacare launch. “The rollout of HealthCare.gov has not been smooth — to say the least — and I shared the concerns of Coloradans directly with the president,” said Senator Mark Udall of Colorado after the meeting. “Consumers should have the time they need to shop for a plan and enroll after the widespread problems with the website are fixed.” Mark Begich of Alaska added: “It’s absolutely unacceptable in this day and age that the administration can’t deliver on the promises it made to all Americans because of technical problems with a website,”  Earlier, Barbara Mikulski of Maryland, who did not attend Wednesday's meeting, said there was “a crisis of confidence” in the reforms, citing reports showing 73,000 people in her own state are getting cancellation notices from existing insurers as a result of new regulations. Democratic senators Joe Manchin and Mary Landrieu have both proposed separate amendments to the healthcare law, either delaying the timetable for requiring people to sign-up or extending the number who can keep existing policies. Six other Democrats facing re-election next year and who attended the White House talks are also asking to postpone the March 31 enrollment deadline, including: Jeanne Shaheen of New Hampshire, Mark Udall of Colorado, Tom Udall of New Mexico, Mark Pryor of Arkansas, Mark Begich of Alaska and Kay Hagan of North Carolina. The White House said it had updated the group on the progress of efforts to fix the website and improve communication with purchasers of insurance, who appear to have been deterred by the widely-publicised problems. “The President and Vice President met with over a dozen Senate Democrats to discuss the progress that’s been made to extend health care coverage to more Americans and to hear their input on existing challenges with implementation of the Affordable Care Act,” said an official. “The president also asked the Senators for input on how implementation of the law is impacting their constituents, and expressed appreciation for their ongoing help.” Obama was among the first to telephone triumphant Democrats Terry McAuliffe of Virginia and Bill de Blasio of New York on their election wins, but the White House has been considerably more subdued about the first anniversary of the president's own re-election which passed almost without notice on Wednesday. Asked to name Obama's second-term accomplishments ahead of the anniversary, Press Secretary Jay Carney struggled to come up with more than three, all of which were in some way compromised or incomplete: budget compromises with Republicans, the partial passage of immigration reform and tentative signs of progress over chemical weapons in Syria. “Eight years can seem like a long time, but given the challenges that face us and all that we have to do, the President is focused on using every day that’s available to him,” said Carney. “We've got a lot of work to do, and the President knows that.”