Country Music Association awards hosts Brad Paisley and Carrie Underwood performed a skit criticising Obamacare. Photograph: Harrison Mcclary/REUTERS At the Country Music Association awards in Nashville, effectively the Grammys for country music, superstar hosts Brad Paisley and Carrie Underwood performed a song skit mocking Obamacare, the Democrats' public health initiative that has proved hugely unpopular amongst conservatives. Paisley, feigning a strained back, was attended to by Underwood who suggested he try Obamacare: "I started signing up last Thursday and I'm almost done!" They then launched into Obamacare By Morning, a spoof of George Straight's country classic Amarillo by Morning, attacking the initiative's slow service and inefficiency. Reading on mobile? Click here to watch It's not the first time Paisley and Underwood have performed political material at the awards – after country singer Hank Williams Jr was fired from ESPN's Monday Night Football for a rant that equated Obama with Hitler, the pair backed Williams by performing the theme from the show with him on stage at the 2011 awards ceremony. Country music has a chequered history with right-wing politics. In 1969, Merle Haggard's satirical Okie from Muskogee featured the lines "We don't smoke marijuana in Muskogee. We don't take our trips on LSD. We don't burn our draft cards down on Main Street. We like living right and being free"; his words were enthusiastically taken at face value by a whole stratum of country fans. Lee Greenwood, John Rich, and Williams Jr all campaigned for Mitt Romney at the last election cycle. But megastar Toby Keith has called himself a 'conservative Democrat', and the Dixie Chicks became liberal darlings following their denunciation of George W. Bush and the 2003 invasion of Iraq. Elsewhere at the awards ceremony, Taylor Swift was presented with the one-off Pinnacle award, given to those who take country music to a wider global audience, whose only previous recipient was Garth Brooks in 2005; Paisley and Underwood thanked her "for never once humping a teddy bear", a dig at Miley Cyrus and her infamous VMA performance. Swift didn't win the top category of entertainer of the year however, which went to the aforementioned George Strait. Winning two awards each were Swift, Blake Shelton, Keith Urban, Tim McGraw and Florida Georgia Line, the latter winning single of the year for their crossover hit Cruise, featuring rapper Nelly.