Barack Obama said if the healthcare law was not working, 'it's my job to get it fixed'. Photograph: Yuri Gripas/Reuters The US president, Barack Obama, has said he is sorry Americans are losing health insurance plans that he repeatedly said they could keep under his signature healthcare law. Stopping short of apologising for making these assurances, the president told NBC: "I am sorry that they are finding themselves in this situation based on assurances they got from me." Signalling possible tweaks to the law, Obama said his administration was working to close "some of the holes and gaps" that have caused millions of Americans to get cancellation letters. "We've got to work hard to make sure that they know we hear them, and we are going to do everything we can to deal with folks who find themselves in a tough position as a consequence of this," he said. The president's apology came as the White House tries to stem a cascade of troubles surrounding the rollout of Obamacare, his signature legislative achievement. The healthcare.gov website, which was supposed to be an easy portal for Americans to purchase insurance, has been riddled by technical glitches. As more than 3.5 million Americans have received cancellation notices from their insurance companies, there is fresh scrutiny over how the president tried to sell the law to the public in the first place. In Thursday's interview, Obama took broader responsibility for the healthcare woes than in his previous comments about the rollout, declaring that if the law was not working "it's my job to get it fixed". "When you've got a healthcare rollout that is as important to the country and to me as this is and it doesn't work like a charm, that's my fault," he said. Some Republicans, who remain fierce opponents of the law three years after it won congressional approval, appeared unmoved by Obama's mea culpa. "If the president is truly sorry for breaking his promises to the American people, he'll do more than just issue a half-hearted apology on TV," the Senate minority leader, Mitch McConnell, said in a statement. In recent days, focus has intensified on the president's promise that Americans who liked their current insurance coverage would be able to keep it. He repeated the line often, both as the bill was being debated in Congress and after it was signed into law. But the healthcare law itself made that promise almost impossible to keep. It mandated that insurance coverage must meet certain standards and that policies falling short of those standards would no longer be valid unless they were "grandfathered", meaning some policies were always expected to disappear.