Political support for Barack Obama's healthcare reforms was ebbing away on Wednesday amid a failure to fix technology problems combined with growing anger among Democrats over the policy itself. White House technology chiefs said that the malfunctioning website at the heart of the reforms is still only running at less than half its promised capacity, and could not say when it would be fixed. More than six weeks since the online insurance exchange was launched in the face of a Republican-driven government shutdown, the crisis is also now threatening to alienate Democrats in Congress who may join former President Bill Clinton in calling for legal amendments. White House attempts to rally public support may be further hampered this week by the release of data expected to show that fewer than 50,000 Americans managed to use the website site to sign up for new health insurance during its first month. The scale of the three-pronged crisis now facing the administration was laid bare on Wednesday when US chief technology officer Todd Park testified before Congress in the latest of series of angry hearings. Park, who was tasked by the White House to help fix the IT problems, revealed that the federal insurance exchange was still only able to handle between 20,000 and 25,000 simultaneous users and also still had a number of “functionality bugs”. It had been designed to handle between 50,000 and 60,000 simultaneous users and was overwhelmed during the initial launch by up to 250,000 a day. Asked by the House oversight committee whether it would be fully operational before a November 30 deadline set by Obama for fixing the problems, Park and David Powner, the government's IT director, both declined to answer. Frank Baitman, another government IT chief testifying to the committee, also revealed that an “ethical hacker” brought in to test security weaknesses had found between seven and 10 flaws, not all of which had been fixed before launch. The ongoing technology issues are hampering a separate political challenge sparked by higher-than-expected numbers of Americans who were told to find new healthcare insurance through the site when their existing insurance plans fell short of new federal standards. The sight of millions being deprived of insurance by a system that was designed to help the uninsured has alarmed Democrats and appears to contradict a promise given by Obama who said “if you like your existing plan” you can keep it. On Tuesday former president Bill Clinton joined a range of senior Democrats anxious about the growing consumer backlash. "I personally believe, even if it takes a change to the law, the president should honour the commitment the federal government made to those people and let them keep what they got," Clinton told online magazine Ozymandias. But the biggest test will come in the House of Representatives on Friday when Republicans will attempt pass legislation amending the Affordable Care Act (ACA) and exempting insurers from the new regulations for another year. This would threaten a major principle of the ACA, known as Obamacare, but majority leader Eric Cantor threw down the gauntlet to anxious Democrats on Friday when he said: “We'll see how many Democrats will put their constituents over politics.” White House officials are scrambling to find an alternative solution to the problem, which Obama has already apologised for, but the difficulties in signing on to the new online exchange makes it harder to explain why millions with existing insurance are being forced to use it. “The president has tasked his team with looking at a range of options, as he said, to make sure that nobody is put in a position where their plans have been canceled and they can't afford a better plan, even though they'd like to have a better plan,” said press secretary Jay Carney on Tuesday. The White House is also due to reveal the first official sign-up numbers by the end of the week, amid reports that fewer than 50,000 had registered for insurance through the federal exchange by November 3. The administration is thought to have aimed for more than 500,000 in October, as a critical mass of healthy new customers is needed to reassure insurers taking part in the scheme. “It was always the case, even prior to the problems with the launch of the website, that enrollment in the first month would be low,” said Carney. “The fact that the website has been so challenging and so problematic in that first month means that the enrollment numbers will be even lower than expected.” • This article was amended on 14 November 2013 to correct the deadline set by Obama for fixing the problems with the website. The original said November 31, when it should have said November 30.