Barack Obama's efforts to provide health insurance for 14 million Americans without cover were dealt a blow on Wednesday when it emerged that the troubled launch of online enrolment had led to only 26,795 people registering through the federal website. A further 79,391 people have registered for insurance in states that are running their own online exchanges, but the lower than expected first month total for the 36 other states using the federal website threatens to undermine the economics of the health reforms, known as Obamacare. Insurers are relying on millions of new, relatively healthy customers to join in order to bring down average costs and make policies more affordable for those with chronic conditions. However, a series of software bugs and bureaucratic stumbles appear to have not just made it difficult to register, but actively scared off possible new customers. It had been hoped that as many as 500,000 people would register in the first month, but the White House faces an uphill battle to persuade people that the system is reliable before new tax penalties kick in next year for those without cover. The Congressional Budget Office initially predicted 7 million people would sign up over the first year. Announcing the long-awaited for October figures, health and human services secretary Kathleen Sebelius put a brave face on the enrolment numbers, even as the website hosting the figures temporarily crashed under the weight of interest from journalists. "The marketplace is working,” she said on a conference call with reporters. “People are enrolling." Health officials say the totals exceed comparable first-month enrolment in Massachusetts, where a similar system was introduced in 2006. It saw only 123 people, or 0.3% of the annual total, sign up in the first month. But Obamacare is under much tougher political scrutiny, and the disappointing start may embolden both Democrats and Republicans who are looking to relax rules that force people with limited insurance plans onto the site. And the White House actively tried to lower the already reduced expectations ahead of the data publication. "No one will be satisfied with the numbers because they will be below what we sought,” said spokesman Jay Carney an hour before the totals were released. Republicans seized on the numbers which they hope will bolster a planned vote in the House of Representatives on Friday which would amend the Affordable Care Act and exempt millions of insurance policies from new minimum national standards. “While there are still questions about whether these individuals have actually purchased a plan or not – these numbers are staggeringly low and are dramatically being outpaced by the millions of Americans who are losing their plans because of the law, despite the President’s promise they would not,” said House whip Kevin McCarthy. “However, the website is not the real problem. Those Americans losing their current plans are now being forced to choose new plans they do not want, cannot afford, and aren’t right for themselves and their families.” In the national launch which began on October 1, California saw the highest rate of sign ups, enrolling 35,000 people in the first month – exceeding the federal site and more the double the next highest state which was New York with 16,000.