President Barack Obama greets guests on the tarmac upon his arrival at Philadelphia International Airport. Photograph: Pablo Martinez Monsivais/AP Barack Obama has called on rich donors to "pay" for a new kind of politics, as he attended his 31st private fundraiser of the year in the home of a cable television executive. On Thursday night, amid criticism of the time the president is spending on political financing, Obama took a five-hour detour to fly to Philadelphia during one of the toughest days of his presidency, in order to raise more than $1m for midterm election campaigns in the Senate. On Tuesday, a Guardian investigation revealed that Obama is carrying out nearly twice as much fundraising as recent predecessors averaged after their re-election year, and more than three times as much as George W Bush averaged in the same period. In his speech to donors at the home of Comcast executive David Cohen, Obama acknowledged the distorting effect of campaign finance. "The only way that we advance the issues that people around the country care about is if we sync up the spirit and the goodness and the decency of the American people with our politics," he said, according to remarks released by the White House. "And there is a whole bunch of stuff that mitigates against that: gerrymandering, and the way campaigns are financed, and super PACs, and the Balkanisation of the media." But the president called on the assembled donors, who were joined by Philadelphia mayor Michael Nutter and Pennsylvania senator Bob Casey, to support a less divisive politics by paying to elect Democrats. "What can bring us together is when we've got people like Bob and we've got people like Michael who are principled and strong, but also recognise that before we became Democrats or Republicans, we were Americans," he said. "If we want that kind of politics, we've got to fight for it, and we've got to pay for it. And all of you have stepped up in the past, and I'm grateful that you're going to be willing to step up in the future as well." Tickets for the event ranged in price from $10,000 to $32,400 and the eight tables of guests contributed more than $1m, according to Cohen. The visit to Philadelphia on board Air Force Once followed a gruelling day for Obama, who spent the afternoon in Cleveland giving a speech on the economy and more than an hour in a White House press conference at lunchtime, apologising for the "fumbled" launch of his healthcare reforms. Republican opponents, though acknowledging that all politicians take part in fundraising, are increasingly questioning the time Obama is spending away from such issues. Orlando Watson, spokesman for the Republican National Committee, said: "The American people don't want a fundraiser-in-chief but rather someone who will lead the country. If the president put half of the time and energy he spends fundraising into Obamacare, millions of Americans wouldn't be losing their healthcare and dealing with the disastrous Obamacare website. When it comes to priorities, we've always known President Obama enjoyed campaigning and fundraising over governing – and on the taxpayers dime nonetheless." Democratic officials defended the president's participation in such events, saying he was a "tremendous asset" in fundraising for the mid-terms. "House Republicans' reckless and irresponsible agenda is not only driving their approval ratings to record lows – it's boosting our fundraising to record highs," said Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee spokeswoman Emily Bittner on Tuesday. "Our donors want to make sure that he has a partner in Congress who will work with him to solve problems, instead of blocking commonsense solutions for purely partisan political reasons."