The House minority leader, Nancy Pelosi, appeared on NBC's Meet the Press, to defend the president's healthcare reform. Photograph: Yuri Gripas/Reuters Democrats rallied behind Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act (ACA) on Sunday, claiming the problems with the disastrous rollout of the president's signature healthcare reform will be fixed. "This is never going to be easy," Nancy Pelosi, the House minority leader, told NBC's Meet The Press. "What matters is what happens at the kitchen table of the American people and how they will have more affordability, more accessibility, better-quality care, prevention, wellness, a healthier nation." The rollout of the ACA, which has included serious problems with the federal website healthcare.gov and a furore over Obama's statement that under the reform no one would lose their health plan, has attracted criticism from Democrats as well as Republicans, with some arguing it will hamper their chances in the 2014 midterm elections. On Friday, 39 House Democrats voted for a Republican "Keep your Plan" bill. On Sunday, leading Democratic figures took to the talkshows to defend the president's record. "This is an issue that has to be dealt with, but it doesn't mean, 'Oh, it's a political issue so were going to run away from it,'" said Pelosi. "It's too valuable for the American people. What is important about it is that the American people are well served, not who gets re-elected. "I don't think you can tell what will happen next year, but I will tell you this, Democrats stand tall in support of the Affordable Care Act. We have great candidates who are running who are concerned about our economy, are concerned about government shutdown." President Obama was forced to backtrack this week and apologise to the millions of people whose existing insurance schemes have been cancelled as a result of the implementation of the ACA, known as Obamacare. Obama said those policies could stand but the move worried some insurers and state officials, who argued it was likely to cause more confusion. On Saturday, the Wisconsin Republican senator Ron Johnson accused Obama of "consumer fraud". "Millions of Americans are coming to realise that those are your tyre tracks on their cancelled policies," Johnson, giving the Republicans' weekly address, said about the president. "Consumer fraud this massive in the private sector could – and should – bear serious legal ramifications. For President Obama, however, it helped secure enough votes to pass Obamacare, and win re-election." Senator Kirsten Gillibrand said problems with healthcare.gov were 'an implementation issue'. Photograph: Rick Gargiulo/The Saratogian/AP On Sunday, on ABC's This Week, the New York senator Kirsten Gillibrand repeatedly referred to the administration's predicament over Obamacare as "an implementation issue", and said it had been a mistake not to be more specific about the types of policies that would be closed down under the ACA. "He [Obama] should have been more specific," she said, "because the point is, if you are being offered a terrible healthcare plan that the minute you get sick you have to go into bankruptcy, those plans should never be offered." But she said Obama could still regain the trust of the American people: "What this is about is everyday people needing access to affordable healthcare. They don't want their coverage dropped because of a pre-existing condition or when they get sick. They want their kids covered up to 26. And they want to have preventive care covered. And that's what this bill does." "They can fix this," added Gillibrand, who later deflected a question from host Martha Raddatz about her supposed presidential ambitions for 2016. "This is a fixable problem. So, once they fix it, people will see, 'I have an opportunity to cover my family.'"