Shopping online is easy and fun – unless it's for a government product, it seems. It turns out shopping for healthcare has become a dismal chore for many with the fortitude to try it. On the first day of the Affordable Care Act, 4.7 million people visited healthcare.gov, but only six successfully enrolled. In the weeks that followed, only 26,795 people were able to enroll in the federal exchange and 79,391 in state exchanges. As any big brand can tell you, a terrible user experience is not something people easily forget. The Obamacare pioneers left the experience grumbling. Only about 5% of uninsured American that logged onto the Affordable Care Act exchanges found the experience to be “very positive”, a Gallup survey released earlier today found. The majority of people, 63%, found the experience to be negative. The trouble with these bad reviews of the program is that they give a valid reason to put off visiting the site to anyone dragging their feet on health insurance The more the site's flaws come to the fore, the more people will delay tackling it.  In fact, the most interesting part of the new Gallup survey, was that only two out of 10 uninsured Americans have actually visited a healthcare exchange. While awareness among uninsured about the health insurance requirement has increased from 56% this summer to 73% this month, most people, at 71%, are still unfamiliar with the exchanges.  Currently, the goal for the government site is an 80% success rate. That would still leave about 9.6 million uninsured, based on the most recent estimates of an uninsured population at around 48 million people. President Obama has said the healthcare program requires rebranding, but that partisan politics will make that difficult. Photograph: Evan Vucci/AP Why customer experience matters Yet the exchanges are missing one big thing that corporate America usually focuses on first: the customer experience.  Within the private sector, only a few retailers can afford such low expectations. If a company has $100m revenues, with just $1m in online revenue, then losing 10% to 20% of online customers due to their experience is just a drop in the bucket. However, if you're a purely online retailer, that loss has a huge impact, explains Peter Sheldon, an e-commerce analyst at Forrester Research. The glitchy and malfunctioning healthcare system has come as a big disappointment to American people, partly because many expected something glossier. President Obama in September compared buying insurance to buying fun consumer products like a plane ticket on Kayak. Now, over a month into the troubled rollout, the president has reversed his tune, saying most recently that “buying health insurance is never going to be like buying a song on iTunes.” Sites popular among consumers are pleasant and clear to visit, such as Amazon and Netflix, which have received customer experience satisfaction ratings of 83 and 75 (of 100), respectively, when ranked by American Customer Satisfaction Index and analytics firm ForeSee. For private companies, such as e-commerce retailers, customer experience can have significant impact on their success. According to Sheldon, the percentage of customers who visit a site and then go on to make a purchase is often affected by their experience on the site. For companies with millions of dollars of online revenue, even a small percentage of users makes a significant impact. So it should come as no surprise companies “really obsess about these numbers” and user experience, says Sheldon. Most specifically, private companies don't like users to have time to dwell on their purchases. They worry about the phenomenon that seems to be occurring with Obamacare: cart-abandonment, where customers have already chosen a product but at some point during the check-out change their minds. The fact that a customer had already chosen the product – or, in the case of the ACA, visited the exchange – shows an “intent to buy”. When a customer abandons the cart, retailers worry that the customer's intent to buy will benefit a competitor instead. When it comes to health exchanges, these rivals come in form of insurance brokers, agents and company sites. According to the New York Times, starting 1 January, health policies sold on the exchanges and off them must comply with the Affordable Care Act. Only in Washington DC or Vermont are consumers restricted to the exchanges. Private contractors who helped build the site said it was the government's responsibility, and not theirs, to make sure the website worked. Photograph: Evan Vucci/AP Obamacare makes the sites of private insurers look good Unlike the state and federal exchanges, private health insurance providers face higher scrutiny when it comes to user experience. According to a 2008 report from Forrester Research, a swing in customer experience drives $70m in revenue within the health insurance industry – $16m in customers switching between different health plans, $54m in word of mouth impact. On average, private health insurance websites rank at the bottom for user experience, as well – well below retailers, hotel, shipping providers and even internet service providers. Yet even those sites look like rock stars compared to Obamacare. Why can't the government take a tip from the private sector? President Obama blamed bureaucracy in a recent interview with NBC’s Chuck Todd. When Todd pointed out that some of the disappointment comes from comparing the healthcare exchange website to Obama’s campaign site, the president answered: Well, the reason is that when it comes to my campaign, I'm not constrained by a bunch of federal procurement rules, right? And how we write specifications and how the whole things gets built out. So part of what I'm gonna be looking at is how do we across the board, across the federal government, leap into the 21st century. What comes next for Obamacare Often times when company sites undergo rebranding, they launch email marketing campaigns to inform potential customers, adds Sheldon. It seems that the administration is going to do just that, emailing those who had unsatisfactory experience first time around to give them another a try. “We want to make sure we are inviting individuals to come back into the system and that their experience will be a positive one,” Julie Bataille, a spokeswoman for the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, said on a conference call. There's a lot at stake. "A negative digital experience can and is likely to lower customers’ opinions of the brand overall,” says Sheldon. The exchanges for the Affordable Care Act are going to have to work hard to overcome bad first impressions.