Comparing the failed rollout of Barack Obama's signature health care legislation to President George W Bush's bungled handling of Hurricane Katrina is, how shall we say, problematic. The most obvious reason is that 1,800 people lost their lives during Hurricane Katrina. Thankfully, no one has yet lost their life because they couldn't log on to healthcare.gov. And for those who were able to navigate the site and buy coverage, they can now look forward to additional years of good health and economic security. That's a very different outcome – and a much more positive one – then what one might expect from one of the worst natural disasters in American History. But the crassness of persistent Obamacare-Katrina comparisons is only one part of the problem. When political observers argue, as the New York Times did, that President Obama's website issue "threatens the rest of his agenda but also raises questions about his competence in the same way that the Bush administration's botched response to Hurricane Katrina undermined any semblance of Republican efficiency", they are making an argument that is grounded almost entirely on a myth. Hurricane Katrina didn't destroy George W Bush's presidency. Iraq and a faltering economy did. Along the same lines, Obamacare's woes are highly unlikely to destroy Barack Obama's presidency. An economy that continues to putter along with high unemployment and mediocre growth will keep his approval ratings in negative territory. And truth be told, that agenda wasn't going anywhere anyway. To understand why the "Katrina moment" argument is such a fallacy the above chart, which aggregates Bush's second term approval rating, provides compelling evidence. A Category 3 storm hit the Gulf Coast in August 2005, thousands died, many others were uprooted from their homes or lost everything. The New Orleans Superdome became a house of horrors, the country was introduced to the over-his-head Fema director Michael Brown ... and yet George W Bush's approval ratings barely moved. Instead, they simply continued the downward spiral that had begun just a few months after his second term inauguration. If there was a more visible drop-off in Bush's support anywhere, it comes in the spring of 2006. What happened then? War deaths in Iraq increased dramatically, both among US troops and also Iraqi civilians. That is very much consistent with political science research, which, as a general rule, finds that economic factors, major scandals, wars and battle deaths move approval ratings, as opposed to one-off events, no matter how much pundits want to hype them. Ironically, Bush was a beneficiary of these exact factors. His approval ratings shot up after September 11th (it was both the strongest polling rally in Gallup's history – 35 points – and the longest lasting). They remained high through the initial stages of Iraq War. By 2005 into 2006, as the conflict worsened, his numbers began to plunge, particularly as violence in Iraq increased. They took an even further hit when the economy started to go south at the end of his presidency, finishing up at a extraordinarily dismal 26%. So while the response to Hurricane Katrina might have been poorly handled, it was hardly Bush's undoing as president. So what about Obama? How have Obamacare's problems affected his public approval? A recent Politico article captures a flavor of the political zeitgeist: "President Barack Obama is suffering the worst season of his presidency because people are mad that critical parts of the Affordable Care Act are not working the way they are supposed to work." Not so fast. According to the most recent aggregated polling data at Huffington Post's Pollster, Obama's disapproval currently stands at 52.5% and his approval at 42.1%. Pretty bad. But here's where it stood on 1 October, the day Obamacare went on-line (ish): 51.2% disapproval and 43.3% approval. Also pretty bad – but not much different. Obamacare's problems were initially overshadowed by the government shutdown and debt limit fight. If one starts from that vantage point, Obama's numbers have moved less than 1pt in either direction. It's possible that there is a polling lag and his numbers will shoot down further, but the evidence that Obamacare has resulted in a major downturn in the president's public approval simply isn't there – yet. Moreover, Obama's public approval numbers have been on a downward trend since the middle of May. Guess what happened in May 2013? Americans' confidence in the economy fell off a cliff. Gallup's Economic Confidence Index stood at -3 in May (a rather sad high point for Obama's presidency) and fell to as low as -39 during the government shutdown. Even though Obama is perceived to have "won" that showdown with Republicans, it negatively affected his ratings – just as it did during the previous debt limit showdown in the summer of 2011. This suggests that dramatic examples of government dysfunction should perhaps be added to the short list of events that decisively affect presidential approval. In fact, one of the realities of Obama's presidency, all too rarely mentioned, is that he is a fairly unpopular president. Aside from his first few months in office, the first few months after his re-election (when economic confidence was particularly high) and the two months following the Democratic National Convention in September 2012, his approval rankings have consistently been in the red. So while his rankings are worse today than pretty much any point in his presidency, his unpopularity should not necessarily come as a complete surprise. After all, he's presided over an economy that has been either mediocre or terrible since he took office. This isn't to say that the rollout of Obamacare has been anything less than a colossal screw-up. In a country already abnormally suspicious of its federal government and thoroughly convinced of its incompetence, the failures of healthcare.gov have compounded the already significant challenges facing progressive reformers. While it's not hard to imagine a future in which comprehensive health care reform becomes something of a political boon for Democrats, we're rather far off – and now further off – from that point. Nonetheless, barring a complete inability to fix the health care website, this too shall pass. Healthcare.gov will get fixed, millions of Americans will be able to buy health insurance … and Obama's approval ratings will improve a smidgen – and probably not much more than that. Like pretty much every other president, Obama is at the mercy of the country's economic performance. Of course it may not matter much anyway. Obama's political agenda – with a 70% approval rating or a 30% one – is destined to remain on life support as long as Republicans are in control of the House of Representatives. With Speaker of the House John Boehner making clear that he has little intention of moving forward with immigration reform and the likelihood of a major budget deal even more remote – Congress's deep legislative slumber is almost certain to continue for the foreseeable future. So fix that website stat Mr President; dabble in foreign policy a bit, maybe get the Iran nuke deal done or make a big push on Arab-Israeli peace talks; take a few trips overseas, spend time with the family, maybe get in a fight with Republicans over judges. But those lousy poll numbers and those big legislative initiatives, they probably aren't going anywhere for awhile.