In the battle to sign up the “young invincibles” for healthcare insurance, some pro-Obamacare advocates believe they have found the perfect ally – their moms. While recruitment is steadily growing, there is concern that low-risk, healthy young adults may not be so keen to sign up. Unless they take insurance through state exchanges or the federal healthcare.gov website, the pool will be unbalanced by all those newly insured who are older and may have chronic conditions, making payouts for medical care more likely. But some of the so-called young invincibles are expected to prefer to pay the fine, arguing that they do not need health insurance because they are unlikely to get sick. But Nick Duran, Florida state director of Enroll America, says there is a way to change their minds, not least over the Thanksgiving dinner. “Moms are a major influence in a family. We do a lot of our outreach and messaging to moms. They have a good deal of influence on the coverage of the family and the son about to turn 27,” he said. Enroll America is targeting mothers as a way to reach entire communities too. She is going to influence not only her family but her community, her friends, her church,” Duran said. Duran is also recruiting young people who can spread the word. A 27-year-old man with type 1 diabetes from Palm Beach came for help, went into the website and enrolled in a platinum plan for which he is paying less than $200 a month. “Now he is working with us. We're going to have thousands [like him] in the next few weeks.” Gepsie Metellus, executive director of the Sant La Haitian neighbourhood center in Miami, is also seeing young people get involved, explaining insurance to their families who may not speak English or understand the documents even in Creole. “To a large extent they can be a go-between for their parents,” she said. “But we want them to understand that an accident can happen at any time and they do happen at any time. At least they need a catastrophic policy.” She and her staff were prepared to give young people examples of disasters that had wrecked the lives of young people who thought themselves invincible, to “shake them into understanding”. Meanwhile, a counter-offensive in the battle for the young is taking place on campuses across America. Generation Opportunity, funded by the anti-Obamacare billionaire Koch brothers, who have already excited controversy with a series of “Creepy Uncle Sam” TV adverts, recently threw a tailgate party at the UM-Virginia Tech football game. This is how David Pasch, the group's communication director, described it in an email printed in the Tampa Times: "We rolled in with a fleet of Hummers, F-150s and Suburbans, each vehicle equipped with an 8in high balloon bouquet floating overhead. We hired a popular student DJ from UMiami (DJ Joey), set up OptOut cornhole sets, beer pong tables, bought 75 pizzas, and hired eight “brand ambassadors”, aka models with bullhorns to help out. Student activists independently brought (lots of) beer and liquor for consumption by those 21 and over. Oh yeah, and we educated students about their healthcare options outside the expensive and creepy Obamacare exchanges." There are plans, he said, for similar student parties elsewhere. On campus away from their families, students may have other things on their mind than health insurance, but at least in historically uninsured communities, campaigners are finding high levels of interest, if also frustration. Some have been advising people not to try to sign up yet, but wait until the technical problems are resolved. “Our community is very determined to get their insurance,” said Josephine Mercado, executive director of Hispanic Health Initiatives, which offers health fairs, classes and screening to central Florida families. “They are trying. I have advised them that maybe they should wait until December. I don't want them to get so frustrated that they give up. Some people have not had any kind of insurance in their adult life. They need help – they really do.” Metellus also says she has advised waiting to the many Haitians who want to enroll. “We have said take your time, there is no hurry,” she said.  Nothing becomes effective before January 1st, so wait. It is an opportunity for people to be better educated and informed. Buying insurance is not easy for all these people who have never done it before and come with preconceived notions.” Many people believe that Obamacare is a single insurance plan – and that it is free. “The biggest thing is the misconception of what the ACA is,” said Paul Salazar, a navigator working for the Jessie Trice Community Health Center in Miami, where the patients are 64% African-American and 28% Hispanic. “They think it is free healthcare for everybody. They come to me and say I want to sign up for Obamacare. When do I get my free insurance?” His colleague Myrlene Charles, who is Haitian, says wrong messages have been put out by Haitian radio and she has to put people straight. “They are shocked,” she said. “Even now my parents are listening to this radio, misleading the Haitian community." It makes her job very difficult “if people on the radio who have a voice that millions of people listen to are giving out the wrong information.” Mercado said 75% of the Hispanic people in contact with her organisation are uninsured and ill-informed. “There are so many myths, misinformation and even lies,” she said. “Someone was telling them a disc would be inserted into their body, another spoke of death camps. I'm just hoping it will get straightened out. I believe it will be. Our community is not only the largest group of uninsured, but there are also serious cases of obesity and diabetes – chronic diseases that are driving health costs.” But there is no doubt about the interest from the uninsured. At the Borinquen medical centers of Miami-Dade, which are, like the Jessie Trice centers, federally qualified and subsidised with federal funds, chief administrative officer Paul Valez talks of “overwhelming demand”. They are one of the largest health centres catering for the Hispanic population in the US. Every week, he says, they have hundreds of people coming to find out what is available to them and how much it will cost – some 3,500 so far, he said. “The whole process is one of education,” he said. “We were hearing all the negative information about the website, but it is a process like buying a cell phone plan or car insurance. People don't know the questions to ask.” But they are finding out and the website appears to be working better. He is now hearing of six or seven completed insurance plans every day.