Our Katie Rogers popped off to catch up with America's greatest national treasure, Congresswoman Michele Bachmann of Minnesota, whom you might remember from her spectacularly unsuccessful presidential run. Bachmann was there to kick off Tea Party's Annual Blogger Awards: After being introduced as a “true Tea Partier to the core” and “one of the number one targets” of the liberal news media, Rep. Michele Bachmann has arrived at the conference to a packed room and a standing ovation to introduce the Tea Party’s annual blogger awards. She starts off with a slight to Mark Zuckerberg’s social network by putting blogging and tweeting first: “Facebook is so old nobody does it anymore, is that true?” Gauging her audience to be comprised mostly of the young people her party is trying hard to mobilize, Bachmann starts by asking the crowd how much fun they’re having and calling CPAC the best party of the year. She then introduces conservatism's basic doctrine, repackaged for a younger generation: a commitment to personal responsibility. Her message to millennials: “Grow up and assume the responsibilities of life, it’s fun!” She broaches the topic of student loan debt by talking about her college-age daughter raising her own money to take a volunteer trip to Haiti, while working her way through school.  “Now she’s helping orphans,” Bachmann says. “Because she has enough, and a little bit more. That’s what we’re all about. That’s what this country is all about.” Which makes for an easy segue into an attack against liberals: “I love this party that calls themselves progressives,” the former failed presidential candidate says. “They’re so wedded to the ideas of the past that don’t work and fail.” All of this ties into innovation, technology the power of human capital -- and capitalism. Steve Jobs didn’t get government grants, she tells the crowd. “Through the miracle of bloggers we’re telling this good story.” Bachmann then unveils the Blogger of the Year Award: It goes to Julie Borowski, who started Token Libertarian Girl as a YouTube channel out of her parents' house. The Best Kept Secret award goes to The Lonely Conservative. Winner of the Best News Blog of the year was posthumously awarded to Andrew Breitbart. Katie reports the crowd thinning out. The activist journalist James O’Keefe presents an award to a near-empty room. 