Barack Obama has hailed Hollywood as a locus of economic and diplomatic power which has projected America's progress through films and TV shows such as Star Wars and Modern Family. The president told a gathering of entertainment industry executives and employees near Los Angeles on Tuesday they had bolstered US influence and made a better world. “We have shaped a world culture through you.” The praise, which contrasted with criticism of Hollywood from conservatives, came as he concluded a three-day west coast tour tapping wealthy supporters for fellow Democrats in advance of next year's midterm elections. “I have come here today because this is one of America's economic engines,” Obama told an audience at Jeffrey Katzenberg's DreamWorks Animation studio in Glendale. “Not just DreamWorks but this whole cluster of companies that generations have grown up knowing.” Entertainment was one of the US's biggest exports and shored up what made it “exceptional”, he said. “Believe it or not, entertainment is part of our american diplomacy.” Hollywood transmitted US tolerance and diversity through stories to a global audience, he said. They might not know the Gettysburg address, but if they're watching an old movie – Guess Who's coming to Dinner, the Mary Tyler Moore show, or Will and Grace and Modern Family – they've had a front row seat to our march towards progress. Even if their own nations haven't made that progress yet.” The lavish approval contrasted with Rick Santorum, the former senator and presidential candidate, who recently called Hollywood the “devil's playground”, following a long line of GOP grumbles about the industry's liberalism. In the early 1990s President George H Bush and vice-president Dan Quayle respectively criticised the Simpsons and Murphy Brown, the latter about a single mother, as poor role models. Obama also lauded Hollywood for creating middle-class jobs in southern California. “Entertainment is one of the bright spots of our economy. The gap between what we can do and what others can do is enormous.” He gave an upbeat assessment of the economy, saying America had “largely fought its way back” from recession by reducing the deficit and making cars, smartphones, apps and other products. The president also defended Obamacare, saying a “rough” rollout was improving, and cited The Godfather to take a swipe at Republican “obstruction and dysfunction”. “Marlon Brando had it easy because when it comes to Congress it turns out there's no such thing as an offer they can't refuse.” This week's visit to Seattle, San Francisco and Los Angeles underlined the west coast's position as a Democratic bastion and offered the president respite from criticism in Washington over health care and the Iran deal. Silicon Valley, Hollywood and other allies turned out in force for seven fundraisers to boost party coffers in advance of next year's mid-term elections. Obama was due to visit in September but the government shutdown and tensions over Syria forced a cancellation. The president is unable to run again but has made a record-breaking fundraising spree since April, according to a Guardian investigation, raising an estimated $40m to help Democrats win back control of Congress. President Obama greets actor Steve Martin as actor Jim Parsons looks on at Dreamworks Studios. Photograph: Jewel Samad /AFP /Getty Before his speech on Tuesday, Obama toured the DreamWorks Animation studio which made Shrek, Madagascar and The Croods. Katzenberg, the studio head, is a major donor. In addition to tapping his own fortune, Katzenberg has rebooted Hollywood support for Obama, repeatedly lobbying executives, producers and actors to stump up cash. Obama called the mogul a great friend and counsellor. “His place in the entertainment industry is legendary. I don't need to puff him up too much. He has a healthy sense of self,” he told the crowd, drawing laughs. Earlier in the day, he a attended a roundtable meeting with supporters in the Hancock Park mansion of Marta Kauffman, co-creator of the sitcom Friends, and her husband Michael Skloff, the composer who wrote the show's theme tune I'll Be There For You. The trip packed in seven fundraising events, including a gathering on Monday at the Beverly Hills estate of former basketball star Magic Johnson which drew the actors Diane Keaton and Samuel L Jackson. Obama joked about his failings as a basketball player: Keep in mind that the last time Magic played basketball was with me at my 49th birthday party, and I just want to tell you, it wasn't pretty.” The president on Monday also attended a fundraiser at the home of Haim and Cheryl Saban which drew Tom Hanks. Haim Saban, the CEO of Saban Capital Group and a supporter of Obama and Israel, endorsed the nuclear deal with Iran. Harry Reid, the Senate majority leader, and Michael Bennet, head of the Democrats' senatorial campaign committee, also attended. Ticket prices for each event reportedly ranged from $2,500 to $32,400. Hillary Clinton's recent visits to California were widely viewed as efforts to maintain her own profile and relationship with wealthy supporters for a possible White House run in 2016. Obama's trip was not all fundraising. He met the family of Gerardo Hernandez, a Transport Security Administration worker shot dead at LAX, and in San Francisco's Chinatown engaged with a heckler about immigration. 