Small business owners were told to wait another year before they can use an online marketplace to shop for employee medical insurance on Wednesday as US health officials scrambled to fix their broken consumer website instead. In another blow to Barack Obama's healthcare reforms, the bad news was released just as Washington emptied for Thanksgiving and attention had begun to turn to more promising performance among state insurance exchanges. But some engineers will be working throughout the holiday week as the administration also revealed that further software and hardware updates were still necessary before the healthcare.gov consumer site could hit new capacity targets by Saturday's deadline. Julie Bataille, communications director at the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS), told reporters that the decision to delay launch of a separate site aimed at small employers was driven partly by a need to divert technical resources to fixing the main public website. “It was important for us to prioritise the experience of consumers,” she said. Employers looking to use the government's Small Business Health Options Programme, known as SHOP, to find low-cost insurance cover for their workers will have to use paper-based applications or go through brokers instead. “It is important to recognise that under SHOP, many of them are already served by brokers,” said Bataille. The decision to delay the online portion of SHOP until November 2014 came as the administration admitted it would only just hit its target of being able to handle 50,000 simultaneous users on the consumer site by the self-imposed deadline of November 30th. Even then, officials warned that further work would be required after this date to make it more reliable. “It is not a magical date,” added Bataille. "There will be times after November 30 when the site, like any website, does not perform optimally and our work will continue into December and beyond to make further improvements.” John Arensmeyer, president of the Small Business Majority, a non-profit that supports the Affordable Care Act said the news was a blow but claimed the exchange would still be an improvement on current insurance options available for firms with fewer than 50 employees. "It’s disappointing that the online portion of the federal small business marketplace through healthcare.gov will be delayed and it’s important it get up and running as soon as possible," he told the Washington Post. "However, it doesn’t change the fact that the marketplace can offer the most competitive combination of price and quality for small businesses purchasing health insurance." But the delay was seized upon by opponents of the Obama's Affordable Care Act, who said it showed why the reforms should be abandoned entirely. “While Americans prepare for the holidays and one day after President Obama gave another speech trying to blame the ObamaCare trainwreck on Republicans, his administration is delaying yet another portion of his signature healthcare law. With each passing day, it’s clear how much worse ObamaCare is than a website full of glitches,” Republican National Committee chairman Reince Priebus said in a statement. “Yet again the Administration has made a wholesale change to their signature piece of legislation because of the disastrous impact it is having on Americans. It’s time we stop delaying pieces of Obamacare and instead scrap it and start over with common sense reforms that will actually lower costs and increase access to care,” he added.