The Alvsborgsbron bridge and the Roda Stens arts centre in Gothenburg: soon with self-driving Volvos. Photograph: Scanpix Sweden/Reuters A burst of 9 links for you to chew over, as picked by the Technology team Self-driving cars to hit Swedish public roads >> TechHive The project is called "Drive Me" and is a joint initiative between the Volvo Car Group, the Swedish Transport Administration, the Swedish Transport Agency, Lindholmen Science Park and the City of Gothenburg, Volvo said Monday. Together they will make an effort to eliminate deadly car crashes in Sweden, said Erik Coelingh, technical specialist at Volvo Car Group. In the next few years, Volvo will develop its Scalable Product Architecture (SPA) in its XC90 model. The goal is to have the first self-driving cars available to 100 consumers by 2017, Coelingh said. They will be able let their cars navigate about 50 typical commuter arteries that include motorway conditions and frequent traffic jams in and around Gothenburg, the country's second largest city. In case you thought Google was the only company doing self-driving cars. Review: BlackBerry Z30 >> Neowin Brad Sams: The Z30 is the best BlackBerry phone on the market but falls way short of the premium offerings from Android, Apple and even Windows Phone. The hardware for the Z30 is actually quite good. The phone feels great in your hands and the 5in screen does not seem all that large and in fact, from a hardware point of view, the phone is fantastic. Where it all goes downhill, is when you turn the device on. The slow boot time and buggy user experience leaves a lot of room for improvement. We had several instances where the touchscreen stopped responding to input for a few seconds or had an app crash for no apparent reason. The phone still has a considerable learning curve to it as well. Even though the OS now includes a tutorial feature that helps you learn all the gestures, coming from iOS or Android, it's certainly a different experience and it is hard to quantify if that 'difference' is a good thing. The lack of a dedicated home or back button at the bottom of the screen will likely annoy converts to the platform at first and in the retail space, with only a few minutes to try out the platform, could turn off potential buyers. IDC forecasts PC shipments to fall by double digits in 2013; volumes expected ro stabilise above 300m units per tear, but with no significant recovery >> IDC Worldwide PC shipments are expected to fall by -10.1% in 2013, slightly below the previous projection of -9.7%, and by far the most severe yearly contraction on record, according to the International Data Corporation (IDC) Worldwide Quarterly PC Tracker. Interest in PCs has remained limited, leading to little indication of positive growth beyond replacement of existing systems. Total shipments are expected to decline by an additional -3.8% in 2014 before turning slightly positive in the longer term. At these rates, total PC shipments will remain just above 300 million during the forecast – barely ahead of 2008 volumes. Consumers, who used to be half of the market, are in effect on a buying strike. It's essentially turned into a replacement business. Dark marketplace closes after theft of £3m in bitcoins >> BBC News Darknet market Sheep Marketplace has shut down after $5.3m (£3.3m) in bitcoins was stolen from the site. The site shut down over the weekend and visitors today see a notice blaming the theft for the closure. It said the theft was carried out by a vendor on Sheep who exploited a bug in the site's software to steal the virtual cash. This is a key problem at the moment with Bitcoin: the organisations acting as banks are as vulnerable as the ones in the Wild West of yore. How tablets have redefined the rules of personal computing >> TIME.com Tim Bajarin was asked to look at Microsoft's early efforts with tablets. And now: While I state that the tablet journey has gone on for well over 20 years, its accelerated growth has come in just the last three years. Another interesting point of reference is that most homes in developed markets have one PC or laptop. By 2016, these same homes will have about three tablets each, making them in many ways the most important computing tools in the family. With tablets priced as low as $49 with most of the relatively good models priced between $129 and $199, it's not too far fetched to suggest that every person in the home in these markets could have a tablet of their own by 2016. In emerging markets, we could have at least one tablet per home as well. Although the smartphone has become the dominant personal communications device, its small screen makes it difficult to serve as a fully-functioning personal computer. What's the dividing line between a phablet and a tablet, though? Cloud Horrors >> deRisk the Cloud Breaking Cloud, our collection of Cloud 'horror' stories showing what can happen when a good cloud goes bad …or when a good plan doesn't exist! And Obamacare online is straight in at No.1! Supreme Court refuses Amazon's challenge to online sales tax law >> Gigaom Can states collect sales tax from online retailers that have no physical presence in the state? For now, the answer is yes after the Supreme Court refused a request by Amazon and Overstock to review a lower court's decision that upheld a law that lets New York collect taxes if the companies advertise in the state. Want to fight off content pirates? Just stream your show for free >> Businessweek The question of how to deal with the piracy of music, movies, and other forms of online content isn't likely to be solved soon. But a chapter in a soon-to-be-published book on the digital economy (pdf) by the National Bureau of Economic Research makes a compelling case for media companies speeding up efforts to get as much of their content online as possible. The study looks at what happened in 2009, when ABC (DIS) added a chunk of TV shows to Hulu, the popular streaming-video service. The results were immediate and striking: Illegal downloads of those shows dropped almost 20% compared with a control group. It makes a certain amount of sense that people wouldn't seek out illegal copies of shows they can watch legally. More interesting is the impact that ABC's decision seems to have had on the levels of piracy for other content. Streamed is harder to store, and you can't fast-forward through the ads. Smart. Samsung: Tizen and Firefox could be powerful allies against Android and iOS | SamMobile Samsung has big plans for Tizen, the mobile operating system it is jointly developing with Intel, that's no secret. But, if the words of a Samsung executive are to be believed, those plans might also include the usually unthinkable act of joining forces with a rival operating system. At the Conference for establishing HTML5 Fusion Technique, Wonsuk Lee, Chief Secretary of Samsung, expressed interest in teaming up with Mozilla and bringing Tizen and Firefox OS closer together, due to the support for HTML5 development on both operating systems. Those sound more like small plans. Samsung's attitude to Tizen seems to be to keep it locked in a box. You can follow Guardian Technology's linkbucket on Pinboard To suggest a link, either add it below or tag it with @gdntech on the free Delicious service.