12.54pm ET The President's economic speeches, at their worst, tend to ignore specifics and offer only vague promises to restore the middle class and the American Dream for hard-workin' folks, trying' to pay their bills, et cetera. And while this speech wasn't without its share of the soft stuff, it also delved hard into specifics -- the changes in the economy in the postwar era, figures citing income disparity, and research showing the social effects of inequality on political and even interpersonal relations. For the first half of his speech, he sounded like a researcher at the Center for American Progress presenting an abstract of a new, wide-ranging study. Here's the speech at its best, distilling decades of social and economic trends into a picture of the present day: But starting in the late ‘70s, this social compact began to unravel. Technology made it easier for companies to do more with less, eliminating certain job occupations. A more competitive world led companies ship jobs anyway. And as good manufacturing jobs automated or headed offshore, workers lost their leverage; jobs paid less and offered fewer benefits. As values of community broke down and competitive pressure increased, businesses lobbied Washington to weaken unions and the value of the minimum wage. As the trickle-down ideology became more prominent, taxes were slashes for the wealthiest while investments in things that make us all richer, like schools and infrastructure, were allowed to wither. And for a certain period of time we could ignore this weakening economic foundation, in part because more families were relying on two earners, as women entered the workforce. We took on more debt financed by juiced-up housing market. But when the music stopped and the crisis hit, millions of families were stripped of whatever cushion they had left. And the result is an economy that’s become profoundly unequal and families that are more insecure. Just to give you a few statistics: Since 1979, when I graduated from high school, our productivity is up by more than 90 percent, but the income of the typical family has increased by less than 8 percent. Since 1979 our economy has more than doubled in size, but most of the growth has flowed to a fortunate few. The top 10 percent no longer takes in one-third of our income; it now takes half. Whereas in the past, the average CEO made about 20 to 30 times the income of the average worker, today’s CEO now makes 273 times more. And meanwhile, a family in the top 1 percent has a net worth 288 times higher than the typical family, which is a record for this country. So the basic bargain at the heart of our economy has frayed.  While more narrowly focused on inequality as the problem, this speech did introduce - or reintroduce - some of the issues he's likely to promote in his state of the union address early next year: stalled proposals targeting workplace discrimination, tax reform, immigration reform, universal early childhood education, a hike in the minimum wage, and preservation of the Affordable Care Act. How likely is the Republican-controlled House of Representatives to act on anything he says? Well, reader, you've seen enough by now to answer that question.  Updated at 12.54pm ET