'Obamacare' has its supporters, but many Americans do not know how it works or how it benefits them. Photograph: Mark Wilson/Getty Images Three years to the day since the passage of the Affordable Care Act, most Americans still don't know what it's about – or how it benefits them. In fact, unpopular aspects of Obama's signature health reforms, such as the individual mandate, still resonate most strongly among the public. That's according to the latest poll from the Kaiser Family Foundation. "Though opinion on the law overall remains nearly evenly divided, opponents' attacks seem to have taken a toll on the public's expectations," Kaiser reported. Most Americans said that they still did not sufficiently understand how the ACA will affect their lives, mirroring the information gap that was seen shortly after the act's passage in 2010: SOURCE: Kaiser Family Foundation Health Tracking Poll (conducted March 5-10, 2013) The "vast majority" of the public (78%) also reports that it has not heard enough about their state's decision on whether to expand Medicaid. (You can find out more in the Guardian's state-by-state guide.) While many of the major provisions of the ACA, such as healthcare exchanges, are yet to be implemented, the poll also found that most Americans are unaware of many of the accomplishments of the healthcare law so far. Kaiser reported that while national health spending has slowed "markedly" in recent years, the public is largely unaware of the fact. In fact, the majority (58%) believe healthcare spending has been rising faster than usual. The unpopular individual mandate – which requires that all Americans buy health insurance or face fines – remains the most widely recognized part of the healthcare overhaul, while "the employer requirement, that companies with 50 or more full‐time employees offer insurance or pay a fine, closely follows". More popular elements of the law are less widely recognized. A majority of Americans are aware that the extension of dependent healthcare coverage to children up to the age of 26 and individual subsidy assistance are a part of the law, but other popular elements – such as tax credits for small businesses to buy insurance and provisions to close the Medicare prescription drug coverage gap – are less well known. The trend that "some of the most popular provisions of the law are among the least widely recognized, and vice versa" has continued into a third year, according to the poll. SOURCE: Kaiser Family Foundation Health Tracking Poll (conducted March 5-10, 2013)