President Barack Obama pardons a Thanksgiving turkey called Courage in 2009. He has pardoned the least prisoners of any modern president. Photograph: Alex Wong/Getty Images Despite his platform grin and bouncy walk, President Obama is notoriously uptight. Accredited journalists have recently protested the White House's extreme rigidity. A New York Times photographer even compared it to the Soviet Union. Maybe if Obama had let in some early air and light to the government healthcare website, he might not have botched it quite so grandly. Lord knows what he's been paying attention to. It certainly wasn't his Christian duty. Obama makes a big deal of his religious faith. "I am a Christian. I have a deep faith. So I draw from the Christian faith …. So, I'm rooted in the Christian tradition." And so on. He seems to have forgotten that a Christian's duty is to forgive and pardon. To quote Matthew 6:14-15: For if you forgive other people when they sin against you, your heavenly Father will also forgive you. But if you do not forgive others their sins, your Father will not forgive your sins. As Obama arrives in South Africa to pay tribute to Nelson Mandela, he might recall the great man's example. When some of his supporters objected to Mandela racially integrating his security force, white with black, he responded: "Forgiveness liberates the soul. It removes fear. That's why it's such a powerful weapon." Mandela even invited his Robbens Island jailer to his inauguration as an honored guest as a symbol of reconciliation. In the six years Obama has been president he has pardoned exactly 39 people and commuted the prison sentences of one, while denying 6,700. (A pardon implies justice gone wrong; a far simpler commutation means no opinion but release on time served.) As noted by visiting Harvard law professor Sanford Levinson, "Harry S Truman pardoned his first prisoner eight days after taking office. In contrast, Mr Obama waited 682 days into his presidency before using his power…." Look at the contrast with Ronald Reagan who in his first term alone pardoned and commuted more than 10 times Obama's number. George HW Bush three times as many. Former Republican governor Haley Barbour – in Mississippi! – pardoned 215 last year including convicted killers. "Christianity teaches us forgiveness and second chances," the very conservative Republican Barbour explained. Let's remind ourselves that Obama begs us to give his messed up Obamacare a "second chance". Half the 219,000 federal prisoners are behind bars due to nonviolent drug related crimes. Many older non-violent inmates, some in their 80s and 90s, are under insanely harsh, federally mandated "Maximum Bob" sentences. Attorney General Eric Holder openly crusades against these medieval sentencing guidelines; his boss simply doesn't appear to care. The executive's right, nay its duty, to pardon was built into the Constitution since 1789. The president can be a good Christian and also save the country about $66,000 per elderly low risk (usually very sick) prisoner. Since I dislike "activist" presidents who often actively take us to war, I've grown a real fondness for some of our historically more disreputable chief executives. Historians give Warren Harding a bad time for appointing corrupt pals like Andrew Mellon, who looted the treasury with big tax cuts for the wealthy, and for being an "unrestrained womanizer". But old Warren wasn't all bad. He supported a 40-hour work week and an anti-lynching bill. More to the point, against fierce opposition from American Legion patriots and his own wife, he pardoned the labor saint, Eugene Debs, whom the vindictive prior president Woodrow Wilson had thrown in the federal slammer for opposing America's entry into the first world war. Harding not only pardoned the socialist Debs but invited him to the White House for a friendly chat. So far the only things getting annual pardons from President Obama are Thanksgiving turkeys.