4.11pm ET President Obama fielded all manner of questions today on only the most pressing of topics pertaining to the Republic. (Mostly.) These were some of the more newsworthy moments. • He will speak "pretty definitively" about changes to the NSA's bulk collection of metadata program in January, he's gone over the White House review and consulted with all the right people about changes. He appeared to suggest that the program, in its current form, might be refashioned. "The question we’re going to have to ask is can we accomplish the same goals that this program is intended to accomplish in ways that give the public more confidence that in fact the NSA is doing what it’s supposed to be doing," he said. "It is possible, for example, that some of the same information that the intelligence community feels is required to keep people safe can be obtained by having the private phone companies keep these records longer and create some mechanism where they could be accessed in an effective fashion." • He refused to comment on the the case against surveillance whistleblower Edward Snowden. "I will leave it up to the courts and the attorney general to weigh in publicly on the specifics of Mr. Snowden's case," he said, citing the indictment against him. He did not condemn Snowden on personal terms or question his patriotism, as he has done before. But the president did reveal his frustration with the Snowden disclosures' "distorted" effects on international relations. “We’ve got countries that actually do the things Mr. Snowden says he’s worried about very explicitly — engaging in surveillance of their own citizens, targeting political dissidents, targeting and suppressing the press — who somehow are able to sit on the sidelines and act as if it’s the United States that has problems when it comes to surveillance and intelligence operations." • He suggested that those in congress working on a new round of sanctions against Iran are doing so for purely political purposes. "I'm not surprised there's been talk from members of Congress about new sanctions. I think the politics of trying to look tough on Iran are often good when you're running for office or if you're in office." • He essentially confirmed that sending several gay members in his delegation to the Sochi Olympics in Russia was not a coincidence. Saying that the delegation "speaks for itself," he added, "The fact that we've got folks like Billy Jean King or Brian Boitano, who themselves have been world class athletes that everybody acknowledges for their excellence but also for their character, who also happen to be members of the LGBT community, you should take that for what it's worth... When it comes to the Olympics and athletic performance, we don't make distinctions on the basis of sexual orientation. We judge people on how they perform, both on the court and off the court. On the field and off the field. That's a value that I think is at the heart of not just America but American sports." • Unsurprisingly, he cited the poor rollout of health care reform as the biggest mistake of the year. "Since I'm in charge, we screwed up." • He was upbeat about recent economic news, and said 2014 could be a "breakout year for America." • He welcomed the bipartisan budget agreement. "It’s too early to declare an outbreak of bipartisanship, but it’s also fair to say that we’re not condemned to endless gridlock."