Thousands of Americans had a preview of Barack Obama's 'annus horribilis' during the president's second inauguration ceremony on the national mall last January. Though few could have known it at the time, a broken jumbo-sized television screen beside the Washington monument served as the perfect metaphor for what even his supporters now concede has been a truly horrible fifth year – living up to the Latin lament coined by Queen Elizabeth when Windsor Castle burned. The giant image of a presidential head looming over that frigid crowd in DC gave proceedings a faintly-Orwellian air but unfortunately the sound kept cutting out, interrupting the commander-in-chief's oratory to the point where few of his promises could be understood. As cheers turned to jeers, the difference between the near-universal optimism that greeted Obama's first inaugural address in 2009 and the impatience that would follow his second became painful apparent. A year dominated by similar technological mishaps with a national healthcare exchange and revelations of NSA surveillance that were branded “almost Orwellian” by a federal judge has driven the president's December approval ratings to record lows last seen under George W Bush. Those able to lip-read the 2013 inaugural address will have noted a determination to avoid this frequent fate of second term presidencies. "America's possibilities are limitless,” said an Obama anxious to buck a history of lame duck encores in the Oval office. “My fellow Americans, we are made for this moment, and we will seize it so long as we seize it together." But a glance at the list of priorities set out last January shows how many have slipped through his fingers in 2013 amid unparalleled obstructionism from Republicans on Capitol Hill. Obama's unapologetically-liberal inauguration speech pledged to tackle immigration reform, gun control and gay rights, only to see legislation on all three issues subsequently blocked by Congress. That is not to say there weren't any grounds for hope. Supreme Court rulings in June marked far more significant legal victories for gay couples than the limited workplace rights measure that failed to make Congressional progress. Strong support for immigration reform in the Senate has raised the prospect of a fresh attempt to legalise undocumented immigrants in the House of Representatives in 2014. But the failure to persuade even the Senate to pass gun control legislation – despite America's worst ever school shooting this time last year – became a symbol of a time when, as liberal wags online put it: “If Obama came out in support of oxygen, Republicans would suffocate”. Faced with such intransigence, Obama did his best to hold on to his principles. In October, he stared down an attempt to hold the economy hostage when Republicans refused to fund the government unless he abandoned his flagship healthcare reforms. The refusal to blink may have led to a 15-day shutdown, but both Obamacare and the economy survived long enough to see Republicans agree to a compromise budget in December. Obama rejects the suggestion that 2013 was “the worst year” of his presidency, pointing at the frustrations on Capitol Hill as signs of what he is up against rather than signs of failure. “I understand the point that you’re getting at ... which is that a lot of our legislative initiatives in Congress have not moved forward as rapidly as I’d like,” he told reporters during a scratchy end-of-year press conference on Friday. “I completely understand that, which means that I’m going to keep at it ... the fact that it didn’t hit the timeline that I’d prefer is obviously frustrating but it’s not something that I end up brooding a lot about.” But the self-inflicted wounds to his credibility are harder to shrug off. For critics on the right, false promises given ahead of the implementation of the Affordable Care Act – suggesting that people would be able to keep their existing insurance plans if they preferred them – are held up as evidence that a once famously-wonkish president suffers poor grasp of policy detail. Much of Friday's end-of-year briefing was taken up with discussion of similar assurances given when The Guardian began revealing Edward Snowden's disclosures of NSA surveillance. In his first response six months ago, Obama said: “You can complain about Big Brother and how this is a potential program run amok. But when you actually look at the details, then I think we’ve struck the right balance.” Now, all three branches of government are working to address the almost universally-accepted imbalances that led last week's federal judge to invoke both Orwell and the US constitution. The president admits healthcare implementation was his biggest regret and has hinted at substantial reform of the NSA in 2014 as a result of the revelations, but the polls suggest significant damage to his credibility. And it is not just failures to deliver on the inaugural speech that disappointed many on the left. Two of the most memorable presidential addresses of 2013 dealt with issues that many believed Obama was chiefly elected to tackle: America's rising social inequality and the legacy of president Bush's war on terror. In May, he promised an end to the “boundless war on terror” with measures particularly to rein in the use of drone strikes, but a US attack in Yemen two weeks ago that killed around a dozen civilians in a wedding party showed how little change has yet to occur. Likewise, Obama gave a stirring speech in December on rising inequality, warning that the American dream was in jeopardy, but was forced to watch impotently as Congress ended the year by cutting unemployment benefits and food stamp programmes. Domestic policy is often the graveyard of second-term presidential ambitions and White House supporters point to Obama's foreign policy as a source of more lasting achievement in 2013 – even if credit is still hard to come by. Inside the Washington bubble, the administration's policy toward Syria, for example, is largely regarded as a policy failure because the White House was forced to back down on threatened military action against President Assad over chemical weapons. But delaying bombing to wait for Congressional support gave time for Russia to propose a compromise that eventually averted war and still looks likely to strip Syria of its chemical weapons. Similarly White House talks with Iran over its nuclear weapons may have angered hawks at home and allies in Israel, but they offer the first chance at real detente in a region that has eluded the peace-making efforts of virtually all Obama's predecessors. And on climate change, the fourth great ambition of Obama's inauguration speech, there were signs of progress on emissions controls that may yet spur other countries into action next year. For a president elected on the promise of hope, this Christmas may be time to borrow a line from Tony Blair's 1997 election in Britain, who promised “things can only get better.” “When I look at the landscape for next year, what I say to myself is, we're poised to do really good things,” said Obama as he headed off for a two-week family holiday in Hawai. “The end of the year is always a good time to reflect and see what can you do better next year. That’s how I intend to approach it. I’m sure that I will have even better ideas after a couple days of sleep and sun.”