The federal government official who oversaw the rollout of the Affordable Care Act is to retire, the Obama administration announced on Monday. Michelle Snyder, chief operating officer of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), managed the troubled launch of the healthcare.gov website. She was named in a congressional hearing on 30 October as being responsible for developing the website, which was beset by problems after it launched on 1 October. “I regret to announce that, after 41 years of outstanding public service, CMS chief operating officer Michelle Snyder is retiring at the end of 2013,” said CMS administrator Marilyn Tavenner in an email to staff. “While the agency is losing a key member of its leadership team, we should celebrate Michelle's dedication to a mission that provides vital health care services to tens of millions of our fellow Americans through the Medicare and Medicaid programs. Her colleagues have time and again benefited from that same spirit of service.” As chief operating officer, Snyder was responsible for ensuring that “key milestones [and] deliverables are successfully achieved”. She oversaw all “planning, implementation and evaluation of administrative and operational activities for CMS”, according to the CMS website. Tim Love, who had been acting deputy chief operating officer, will be named acting chief operating officer, an official told the Guardian. Snyder becomes the second high-profile departure from CMS since the botched launch of the government’s healthcare reforms. Tony Trenkle, the agency's chief information officer, left in November “to take a position in the private sector”. His departure was announced by Snyder in her own email to staff less than two months ago. Kathleen Sebelius, the health and human services secretary, had tasked Snyder with the development of healthcare.gov, although Sebelius insisted that Snyder should not be held ultimately responsible. “Michelle Snyder is not responsible for the debacle. Hold me accountable for the debacle. I'm responsible,” Sebelius told the congressional committee. Tavenner, who was also grilled by Congress in October, thanked Snyder for her service and said she had planned to retire earlier. “Finally, I would like to add an additional note of gratitude to Michelle for her willingness to put aside personal considerations over the last year. Many of you know that at the end of 2012 Michelle had completed her fourth decade of public service and was prepared to move on to other opportunities outside of CMS. “But she characteristically chose to postpone her retirement from federal service at my request to help me with the challenges facing CMS in 2013.”