'I predicted a full-scale GOP civil war after the failed effort to stop Obamacare by shutting down the government. That simply didn't happen.' Photograph: Evan Vucci/AP One of the more frustrating things about political punditry is that commentators and op-ed writers can make any extravagant statement they like about foreign policy and national politics and face no recriminations when their confident statements are proven wrong. Indeed, there is precious little in the way of pundit accountability. So in the spirit of encouraging pundits to be more responsible for their statements, I'm taking the first step. I've read every piece that I wrote for the Guardian and Observer this year, and have compiled a list of what I got wrong. In January I suggested that if President Obama were to "hold firm on the debt limit" fight with the GOP it would, "put an end to the ever-escalating legislative hostage-taking, and it will sow havoc among Republicans, further dividing the caucus between its radical wing and its even more radical wing." That didn't happen. The GOP renewed its debt limit strategy in the fall, and also shut down the government in a further escalation of its legislative hostage-taking strategy. Moreover, the decision to raise the debt limit in early 2013 hardly divided the caucus. This article, written in February, was perhaps my biggest mistake. In an argument highly critical of the Pentagon's rhetoric on sequestration, I noted that the Defense Department did no planning for the massive budget cuts because they believed they would not be executed. As I said at the time, "this from an institution that develops powerpoint presentations for taking a trip to the bathroom". But what I failed to mention was that military leaders were prevented from planning by civilian leaders and, in particular, Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta. The article gave the impression that the Pentagon's freak-out over sequestration was driven exclusively by the military. It wasn't. In March, on the eve of sequestration becoming law, I wrote that "President Obama, perhaps wrongly", agreed to meet Republicans halfway during the debt limit showdown in the spring of 2011, by proposing cuts "in domestic spending and even endorsed the controversial notion of increasing the Medicare eligibility age from 65 to 67". That was far too generous. Obama was clearly wrong to do this. He overestimated the willingness of Republicans to default on the debt and he underestimated GOP intransigence in believing that the threat of sequester would lead to political compromise down the road. So too did this pundit. In May, I wrote about the declining number of civilian casualties from America's use of drones against suspected terrorists in Pakistan and Yemen. At the time, I cited the research of The Bureau of Investigative Journalism (TBIJ), which I claimed used "a far broader classification for civilians killed, resulting in estimates of somewhere between 411-884 civilians killed by drones in Pakistan". The use of the term "broader classification" was too slippery. More accurate would have been to suggest that TBIJ draws on a broader pool of sources for tabulating the number of civilian casualties. This is to some extent a question of interpretation, but I should have been clearer on how TBIJ differs from other groups in how it conducts its research. On the Middle East, and in particular the potential for negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians, I'm pretty happy with my track record. I wrote repeatedly that there would be no progress on achieving a two-state solution between the two sides without direct US involvement in the process. With peace negotiations ongoing today because of the efforts of Secretary of State John Kerry, that view has largely been proven correct. However, in this 22 March piece on Obama's trip to Israel and his speech to the Israeli Knesset, I went too far. I criticized Obama for not going far enough in his remarks and pushing the Israelis on the importance of a peaceful resolution to the Arab-Israeli conflict; I was wrong. A speech like that – in the context of Kerry's efforts to get new negotiations off the ground – would have been decidedly unhelpful. But this problematic analysis pales next to the factual mistake that I made twice in regard to Texas's stingy welfare state. On 3 June and 3 July, I said that Texas has "repeatedly rejected" and "consistently refused" to take federal money expanding healthcare for children. It was wrong. Texas has a children's health insurance program and takes federal money. Now to be sure, Texas is a terrible state for poor children. It has the highest rate of uninsured kids of any state in the country. But bottom line: I got my facts wrong. In June I made another big mistake. In a piece looking at the NSA revelations printed in the Guardian I said "we know, for example, that the NSA is required to abide by laws that prevent the international targeting of American citizens". What I meant to write – and should have written – was about the intentional targeting of American citizens. In August, I talked about the likely consequences of a failed GOP effort to stop Obamacare by shutting down the government. I said, "the incandescent rage from Tea Partiers at yet another bout of failed brinkmanship will not be directed at Obama; it will be directed at their own leaders. It's not difficult to imagine that when the smoke clears from this fall's budget showdown and debt limit hostage-taking, that Republicans will find themselves mired in full-scale civil war with Tea Party radicals who are even further emboldened to push their no-compromise agenda on the party". That simply didn't happen. The GOP is not mired in a full-scale civil war. The response from the GOP comedown on the budget and the debt limit was far tamer than I expected, and if anything, the Obamacare website woes united the party. Perhaps the Tea Party came out of the shutdown folly somewhat weakened. But quite simply, my analysis was wrong. Speaking of Obamacare, in an op-ed from October, I played down the problems with Obamacare's lousy launch and said that those Americans who would experience "actual sticker shock in the form of higher premiums"were a small segment of the population and were "basically healthy, young people who earn enough money not to qualify for subsidies". Not exactly. Older Americans are also bearing some of this burden. I continue to believe that on the whole Obamacare is a net positive for Americans, but I was a bit too blase in dismissing the negative impact of the legislation. Also in October, I expressed guarded optimism that with talk of a "grand bargain" now dead there was a good opportunity for a budget compromise between Republicans and Democrats. While both sides were able to reach agreement, it was far less ambitious than I predicted. In short, my enthusiasm was misplaced. Finally, over the summer, I said that I would be voting for Eliot Spitzer in his race for the position of New York City comptroller. In the interests of full disclosure, I voted for Scott Stringer. Thanks for reading and I'll try to do better next year.