There was something almost apocalyptic about 2013. Typhoon Haiyan slammed into the Philippines, the strongest storm ever recorded on land. It killed more than 6,000 people and affected millions. But it was just one of the 39 weather-related disasters costing $1bn or more in 2013. In Australia, record high temperatures forced mapmakers to create a new color on the weather map. Massive wildfires swept through California, historic flooding took out bridges and roadways in Colorado, and tornadoes swept through the Midwest, destroying towns like Moore, Oklahoma. Millions of people are on the move, seeking to escape the effects of climate-related disasters. CO2 concentrations passed 400 parts per million for the first time this year, and yet governments have done little to curb emissions. Meanwhile, hundreds of millions of dollars – much of it from secret sources – flow to climate-denier thinktanks and advocacy groups. Pop culture often explores a change before politicians do, and 2013 saw a rash of post-apocalyptic movies– from World War Z to Oblivion – and zombie apocalypse role-playing games. Much happened that was hopeful this year – a new pope focused on inequality, successful minimum wage campaigns spread across the country, and the number of states allowing gay marriage doubled. But responses to the threat of the climate crisis lead off this year's top stories as we look at seeds sown this year that could make 2014 transformational. 1. We saw surprising new leadership on the climate issue In northeast Nebraska, Native Americans and local ranchers formed a new alliance to resist the Keystone XL pipeline. Seven thousand activists gathered in Pittsburgh to press for action on a wide range of environmental justice issues. Students across North America persuaded nine colleges and universities to divest from fossil fuel companies. Hundreds of climate activists walked out of the COP19 climate talks in Poland to hold their own climate talks. The governors of California, Oregon, Washington, and the Canadian province of British Columbia have committed to taking action on the climate crisis. But Congress remains deadlocked and in denial, and climate scientists – when they let down their careful professional demeanor – express astonishment that world governments have failed to act on what is fast becoming a global emergency. A new potential ally is coming from an unexpected source. Some investors are beginning to worry that fossil fuel companies may not be a good bet. Investors worry about a "carbon bubble". The reserves of oil, gas, and coal counted as assets by the big energy corporations would be enormously destructive to life on Earth if they were allowed to burn. Many believe that new regulation or pricing will keep a large portion of those reserves safely in the ground. If that happens, the companies' reserves, and thus their stock, may be worth far less than believed. Savvy investors are placing their bets elsewhere: Warren Buffett, for example, is investing $1bn in wind energy, which, along with solar energy, is looking better all the time. 2. Native peoples took the lead in the fossil fuel fight In response to Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper's attempt to ramp up fossil fuel extraction on Native lands, Idle No More blossomed across Canada this year. First Nations people held flash mob round dances, blockaded roads, and appealed to government at all levels to protect land and water. And it's not just Canada. In Washington state, the Lummi Tribe is among those resisting massive new coal transport infrastructure, which would make exported coal cheap to burn in Asia. In Nebraska, the Ponca Tribe is teaming up with local ranchers to resist construction of the Keystone tar sands pipeline. Indigenous peoples in the Amazon, the Andes, Malaysia, the Niger Delta, and elsewhere are also at the front lines of resistance to yet more dangerous fossil fuel extraction. Many are turning to the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous peoples and the new Rights of Nature movement for support. Indigenous peoples developed ways of life that could sustain human life and the natural environment over thousands of years. The rest of the world is starting to recognize the critical importance of these perspectives, and there is growing willingness to listen to the perspectives of indigenous peoples. 3. The middle and lower classes fought for economic justice Income inequality is reaching levels not seen since the Roaring Twenties. People stuck in long-term unemployment are running out of options, and those who do find work often can't cover basic living expenses. The issue is now getting attention from mainstream media, becoming one of the defining issues of our time, as President Obama said. Now a movement is building to create a new economy that can work for all. Voters this year passed minimum wage laws in SeaTac, Washington, ($15 an hour) and the state of New Jersey. An overwhelming majority favors raising the minimum wage to $9 an hour. Domestic workers won the right to a minimum wage after years of organizing. The message was also clear in the election of Bill de Blasio, a founder of the Working Families Party, as mayor of New York City. Inequality is a top plank of his platform and his public record. At the national level, Senator Elizabeth Warren's defense of the rights of student borrowers and her proposal to strengthen Social Security (instead of weaken it, as leaders in both parties are discussing) is winning widespread support. There is even talk of drafting Warren to run for president. 4. A new economy is in the making At the grassroots, National People's Action and the New Economy Institute are leading new conversations about what it takes to build an economy that works for all and can function in harmony with the environment. Thousands of people are taking part. And a growing cooperatives movement is linking up with unions and social movements. Some are working with large "anchor" institutions, like hospitals and universities, that can provide a steady market for their products and services. Credit unions, too, are proving their value as they keep lending to local businesses and homeowners as Wall Street-owned banks pulled back. And a new DIY sharing economy is taking off, as people do peer-to-peer car-sharing, fundraising, and skill-sharing, and bring open-source technology to new levels. 5. US military strikes didn't happen The big news of the year may be the two wars the United States refused to instigate. The United States did continue its drone strikes, and the civilian casualties are causing an international uproar, with some calling for an outright ban on drones. And military spending continues to devastate the country's budget. (The United States spent more on the military in 2013 than China, Russia, the United Kingdom, Japan, France, Saudi Arabia, India, Germany, Italy, and Brazil combined.) Few dared to call for the same fiscal discipline from the military and its many contractors as they expect from schools and services for the poor. On the other hand, the United States stepped back from the brink of military strikes against Syria and Iran – a step in the right direction. 6. Pope Francis called for care and justice for the poor And for an end to the idolatry of money and consumerism. He also criticized "ideologies which defend the absolute autonomy of the marketplace and financial speculation." In his "Evangelii Gaudium" he says: Just as the commandment 'Thou shalt not kill' sets a clear limit in order to safeguard the value of human life, today we also have to say 'thou shalt not' to an economy of exclusion and inequality. Such an economy kills. This call is provoking outrage from Rush Limbaugh and Fox News commentators, but elsewhere, it's leading to a new questioning of the moral foundation for a system that concentrates wealth and power while causing widespread poverty. 7. Gays and lesbians got some respect On 26 June, the Supreme Court struck down key provisions of the 1996 Defense of Marriage Act. Today, married gay couples are entitled to federal benefits once reserved for straight couples. The year saw a doubling of the number of states allowing gay marriages, and a third of all Americans now live in such states. Support for gay marriage has flipped from a slight majority opposing it to a majority now supporting the rights of gay and lesbian couples to marry. As a wider range of gender identities has become acceptable, men and women, gay and straight, are freer to shed gender stereotypes without fear of bullying and humiliation. 8. There were new openings for a third party Just 26% of Americans believe the Democratic and Republican parties are doing "an adequate job," according to an October Gallup poll; 60% say a third party is needed. Eighty-five percent disapprove of the job Congress is doing. Even cockroaches (along with zombies, hemorrhoids, and Wall Street) have a higher approval rating according to a recent poll by Public Policy Polling. But it's not the Tea Party that Americans are looking to as the alternative. Support for the Tea Party has fallen: in an October NBC/Wall Street Journal poll, only 21% of respondents had a favorable view of the party. New space has opened for independent political work – the Working Families Party (see #3 above) is an especially interesting model. 9. Alternatives to Obamacare are in the works Democratic leadership believed that the big profits the Affordable Care Act guaranteed to private insurance companies would make the act popular with conservatives. But the resulting system, with all its complications and expenses – and requirements – is frustrating millions. There are features that benefit ordinary people, but it compares poorly to the simpler and more cost-effective systems that exists in most of the developed world. Canadian-style single-payer health care, for example, had the support of a majority of Americans. Some jurisdictions are still looking for alternatives. Cooperative health insurance is available in some states and others are working to establish statewide single-payer healthcare. 10. An education uprising began The momentum behind the education reform agendas of Presidents Bush (No Child Left Behind) and Obama (Race to the Top) is stalling. The combination of austerity budgets, an ethic of blame directed at teachers, high-stakes testing, and private charter schools has stressed teachers and students – but it has not resulted in improved performance. Seattle's Garfield High School teachers, students, and parents launched an open rebellion last spring, joining a handful of others in refusing to administer required standardized tests. The movement is spreading around the country, with more rebellions expected in the spring of 2014. We live in interesting times, indeed. The growing climate emergency could eclipse all the other issues, and the sooner we get on it, the more we can use the transition for innovations that have other positive spin-offs. There's not a moment to lose. • This commentary was originally published 27 December 2013 by YES! Magazine