Why because? … American Dialect Society's word of the year superimposed on the Stars & Stripes. Photograph: Corbis/Alamy "Because" has been voted the word of the year by the American Dialect Society after the humble conjunction "exploded with new grammatical possibilities" in 2013. "No longer", said Ben Zimmer, chair of the new words committee of the American Dialect Society, "does 'because' have to be followed by 'of' or a full clause. Now one often sees tersely worded rationales like 'because science' or 'because reasons'. You might not go to a party 'because tired'. As one supporter put it, because should be Word of the Year 'because useful'". Because, used informally online to introduce a noun, adjective or other part of speech – "because awesome" – received 127 votes from the members of the 125-year-old society, who range from lexicographers to grammarians, linguists and etymologists. It was by far the most popular choice, beating Obamacare, which the society said had moved from pejorative to matter-of-fact shorthand for the US's Affordable Care Act, into second place, with just 39 votes. Slash, used in the sense of "come and visit slash stay", or "I love that place, slash can we go there?" received 21 votes, selfie won 20 votes, and twerk, described by the society as "a mode of dance that involves vigorous booty-shaking and booty-thrusting, usually with the feet planted", landed just seven. "This past year, the very old word 'because' exploded with new grammatical possibilities in informal online use," said Zimmer, who oversaw the society's voting session at its annual conference. The vote has been running annually since 1990, with previous words of the year ranging from 2012's "#hashtag" and 2011's "occupy" to 1990's "bushlips", meaning insincere political rhetoric. The organisation also chose catfish as its most creative word of 2013, used in the sense of "misrepresent[ing] oneself online, especially as part of a romantic deception", sharknado as the most unnecessary word of last year, and underbutt as the most outrageous. The word its members predicted was most likely to succeed was binge-watch, beating glasshole ("a person made oblivious by wearing Google Glass, a head-mounted computer"), while least likely to succeed in the eyes of the society was Thanksgivukkah, the "confluence of Thanksgiving and the first day of Hanukkah that will not be repeated for another 70,000 years".