Eve Campbell was determined to beat the last-minute December rush, not for Christmas shopping or airline tickets, but for Obamacare. With the 23 December deadline to sign up for health insurance effective on New Year’s Day looming she completed her enrollment – or thought she did.  "I did notice on the last computer screen it said, 'We will be sending you more materials,'" Campbell told the Guardian. "So I have been waiting for the materials." While she waited, Campbell logged back onto the New York state exchange looking for – and not finding – a way to do one last, very important thing: pay for the coverage for which she’d signed up. Finally, more than two weeks later, Campbell heard from her insurer, Empire Blue Cross Blue Shield. "I got a letter on New Year's Eve, and it said: 'Thanks for choosing our plan but we still haven't received your first premium payment,'" Campbell said. The letter included directions to the insurer's website where payments could be made, and Campbell submitted hers that same day. Campbell is not the only person to successfully complete an application for health insurance through either the federal or a state exchange only to become baffled by the Affordable Care Act's two-step system. Consumers shop for coverage through a marketplace set up by the federal government or the state in which they live, and then, when they think they're done, they have to jump across the internet to the websites of their private insurers in order to pay their first month’s premium, without which they are not actually covered. In fact, confusion about this issue was so common that, days after Campbell submitted her application, insurers nationwide agreed to postpone the payment deadline from 31 December to 10 January. Had the deadline not been extended, those who had not yet paid as of 1 January would have had to start the enrollment process all over again.  Now, time is once again growing short for consumers like Campbell. By Friday, most insurers will finalize the last of the enrollments for coverage beginning 1 January of this year. And then they will discard the applications of anyone who has not already paid them directly for coverage, leaving some people who thought they’d done everything right without health insurance.  The payments system, much of which was left to the last minute, could also prove a problem for the Obama administration, as it could undermine what had been a relatively successful attempt to compensate for the troubled few weeks that the exchanges – and those who attempted to access them – experienced last fall. During Healthcare.gov's first week as a fully functioning site, after the 1 December relaunch, more than 3.7 million people logged on to the site to get their chance to choose a healthcare plan. As of 29 December, about 850,000 Americans had applied for coverage through state exchanges and 1.1. million through the federal one. Come mid-January, if there are enough missed payments and discarded applications, these numbers might look very different.  Healthcare.gov reminds consumers to enroll by 23 December for coverage starting as soon as January 1. Photograph: Jon Elswick/AP As a result of all the technical difficulties with the systems thus far, thousands of people have signed up for healthcare coverage multiple times. Many others who believe they are covered will find out soon that, because they didn’t pay that first premium on time, they aren’t. The full extent of the problem will likely not be known for some time, especially because some insurers, mindful of the delays, have extended their deadlines again, moving them to later this month. California's exchange, Covered California, has done the same for all of the plans offered through its system.  In an attempt to decrease the number of incomplete applications, insurance companies around the nation, joined by the administration and the states that set up their own exchanges, have spent the past few weeks doubling up on efforts to remind people to pay their first month's premiums.  Their first piece of advice: check your physical mailbox. "If an individual who believes they’ve been enrolled doesn’t receive a letter from us after a week or so, that’s a flag for them," said Cynthia Michener, an Aetna spokeswoman. Within a week of submitting their application on the exchange, Aetna customers now receive letters informing them of "the importance of making their first month's premium payment", including "an invoice for that initial premium payment and information about their various payment options", Michener told the Guardian. Blue Shield of California also sent out letters requesting payment from everyone who enrolled. "We are working closely with Covered California and taking multiple actions to remind members that their first month's premium needs to be paid by January 6 to ensure a January 1 effective date and avoid gap in coverage," Mia Campitelli, a spokeswoman for Blue Shield of California, said. The company saw a "surge in payments" starting in the second week of December, she added. Robert Laszewski, president of Health Policy and Strategy Associates, says the insurers he has spoken to have received 50% of the necessary payments, up from 15% in December. According to him, the increase in payments received can be attributed to the approaching due date as well as to the fact that majority of those who enrolled through the exchanges did so in mid- to late December, and would have received any letters or invoices from their insurers some time after that.  "Fifty percent is not an alarming number right now. There's no reason to hit the panic button just yet," said Laszewski, noting the most recent delay in payment deadlines. 