Under a new Senate plan for immigration reform, it would take undocumented workers more than 10 years to earn a green card. Florida senator Marco Rubio seems willing to talk the whole time, if that's what's required to bring Republicans on board. Rubio went on seven Sunday morning talk shows, including two Spanish-language programs, to flog a developing immigration deal, speaking at filibuster length to a carousel of hosts from a studio in Miami. It was unclear which interviews were pre-recorded. He acquitted himself admirably, hammering like a woodpecker from one angle after another, depending on his audience. On Fox News Sunday he spoke passionately about the importance of improving border security. On NBC's Meet the Press he explained his optimism that Republicans would support the reform effort. On Univision's Al Punto he immediately invoked dreamers, immigrants who don't have the pertinent papers despite living in the United States since childhood, and said the plan would help them. Rubio became the first person ever to appear on seven Sunday shows in a single day. The feat of appearing on all five principal English-language shows (ABC, NBC, CBS, CNN and Fox) has been known as "the full Ginsberg", after the late William H Ginsburg, who in 1998 appeared on all five in his capacity as Monica Lewinsky's lawyer. It is unclear whether "the full Marco" will catch on as an exploit for America's talking heads, or whether the challenge is simply too daunting for anyone else to seriously consider. Rubio, the son of Cuban immigrants, has emerged as the Republican point man on immigration reform. He is part of a group of eight senators crafting a bipartisan deal that is expected to emerge as draft legislation as early as this week. A couple of his lines suffered wear from repetition – at least, for any masochist who taxed his or her TiVo in order to catch all of his appearances. "I'm a senator," Rubio said, again and again. "I get paid not just to give speeches, I get paid to solve problems." "This is not amnesty," Rubio said, again and again. "Amnesty is the forgiveness of something. We're not forgiving anything." "[Recipients of work permits] will not qualify for any federal benefits of any kind, including Obamacare," Rubio said, again and again. "No federal benefits. No food stamps, no welfare, no Obamacare." As with aging rock musicians, it's crucial for politicians to be able to make the same sounds over and over without betraying fatigue or boredom. On Sunday Rubio turned in a performance worthy of Mick Jagger grinding away at Jumpin' Jack Flash. On NBC, he faced off with an under-the-weather David Gregory, whose laryngitis made him sound like he'd just gargled gravel. Gregory threw up a poll showing Rubio trailing Hillary Clinton among Hispanics in a prospective 2016 presidential contest. "Isn't that a sign of just how big the hole is even among Hispanics in this country, between you and top-tier Democrats?" Gregory croaked. "This is not about improving anyone's poll numbers," Rubio said. "This is very simple. I'm a senator. I get paid not just to give speeches, I get paid to solve problems."