The deputy prime minister is dragged in for a dressing down from the home secretary. Photograph: Chris Radburn/PA • As a tireless worker for community relations, Akbar Dad Khan felt well qualified to take issue with Nick Clegg's foray into the minefield of immigration. Clegg called for cash deposits of more than £1,000 to be paid by selected migrants before they can enter the country. Khan thought that misguided. "We hope you will give a thoughtful consideration to what we have to say on the subject," he wrote on behalf of his group, Building Bridges. The office of the deputy prime minister certainly did that. "As the points you raise are a matter for United Kingdom Border Agency, he [the deputy PM] has asked me to forward your letter to them so that they may respond directly," replied Clegg's lieutenant. That was on 5 April. The UK Border Agency had been abolished by home secretary Theresa May four days earlier. For a very short time, they all agreed with Nick. Now they barely tell him anything. • To Brussels, where Ukip balances an innate scepticism of all institutions European with the also very British belief that sleeping dogs should lie and that people, unless they prove themselves unworthy, should be treated with respect. With that in mind, Ukip MEPs responded to a mild-mannered emailed request from a centre-right Austrian, Paul Rübig. Would you care to attend a meeting of the pan-European working group, they were asked. Roger Helmer declined, copying in his colleagues. "I am by no means a supporter of the pan-european movement (whatever that is)," he said. Colleague Gerard Batten, MEP for London, proffered a guess. "Roger, Holy Roman Empire/Fourth Riech (sic), something along those lines," replied Batten. Then he sent it to all other MEPs, their assistants and to staff working throughout the European parliament. Makes you proud, doesn't it? • Busy, busy, meanwhile, at Iain Duncan Smith's Universal Jobmatch scheme. No sooner did we flag up the bogus ad for border officials than someone took it down again. They did a bit of a sweep. The comedy ad looking for a new "Gate-Keeper" capable of dealing with such as Andrew Mitchell, of plebgate fame, and posted by the company "Tory-Trix" has also disappeared. The smack of firm management, and not before time. • The happiest days for the felon once known as Conrad Black. He is back in the country of his birth, he has his wife and writings – and, thanks to the Canadian health system (rated fifth in the world for its high level of public funding), he has his health. Reborn again, he writes enthusiastically in the National Post about how "the Canadian health service saved my left eye", lauding a healthcare system that opponents of US Obamacare point to accusingly as the typical socialisation of medicine. Waking to find the vision in his left eye seeming "a medium thick gray monochrome, heavily overlaid with symmetrical yellow zigzag patterns", he was rushed to surgery where doctors inserted a wire in a large artery in his groin and directed it to clear a blockage in his eye. There were risks. Worst case scenarios, he could have had a stroke. Before the successful procedure, devoutly Catholic Conrad asked for a moment. He sought to "formulate a silent prayer before the effect of heavy sedation muddled my theological coherence". Typical. Lesser mortals just reflect and hope for the best. • Finally, if the London Marathon goes ahead on schedule, spare a thought during the day for one runner – a balding, wiry, smiling figure called Joe Derrett. A political communicator admired in the salons of London, he has faced many challenges in his time. Trying to stop Ken Livingstone self-destructing during the last mayoral election in London was one of them. He was unsuccessful then, so he knows you can't win them all; and he doesn't expect to win London's 26-mile race. And yet his charity effort is worthy of note because if he succeeds in covering the route on Sunday, his plan is to run the 26 miles again in reverse the following day. He claims the ruse has never been tried before. There's probably a reason for that. He'll be tweeting – so the ambulance will know where he is. Twitter: @hugh_muir