That's it, friends. All this liveblogger can remember after that short blitz of a debate is hearing constant cat-calls from the crowd and the word "Nancy Pelosi" being uttered every ~10 seconds. Fortunately, Emma G. Keller has much more to offer. Thank you for joining us. At the end of the night it was clear that there is less difference between the two candidates on the issues than they would have you believe. Both are fiscal conservatives who don’t want Washington to interfere with the running (and taxing) of the district, but both are keen to depict themselves as willing and able to bring bundles of taxpayer dollars home to South Carolina. Busch might have been the Democrat but she was the one who quoted Reagan and Cheney and denounced the labor unions. So how much difference will the debate have made? It will have helped Sanford who is going to have far fewer ad minutes on TV for the next week than his opponent. But he was fighting for his life. With his fundraising having nosedived, this was his one real shot at positioning himself before the voters before voting next Tuesday. He tried to turn that into an advantage by attacking Busch’s fundraising as ‘special interest dollars’ pouring into the state. But Sanford overplayed his Nancy Pelosi card, and while his repeated references to her money got chuckles at the beginning, by the end there were nothing but groans. “My only special interest is to the people of South Carolina 1. Period,” said Busch. At which point the debate sound was lost. If Busch had had more political experience she would have been able to go after Sanford’s past, and present him to voters as an untrustworthy husband and sleazy politician. But she hardly touched him on his personal life, while he skillfully put her on the defensive more than once during the debate. He turned her fundraising lead on its head, by depicting her as a slave to out of state special interests, and he was able to bring up his own domestic troubles, doing so on his own terms. “You don’t go through the experience I had back in 2009 without a great deal of humility,” said Sanford going on to explain that having had this experience made him a more skilled negotiator. Busch had the last word. “We’re not going to look behind us we are going to look to the future,” she said. Then she launched her own zinger. She pledged to take a 10% cut in her own salary when she got to Congress. It was a nice move. “Our best days are ahead of us,” she said and asked for the audience’s votes. Rapturous applause and cheering broke out. Maybe she did OK after all.