11.52am ET OK this time the briefing is really over. The president took seven questions not counting followups. • The president announced the US "has evidence that chemical weapons have been used in Syria," but it's not clear when or by whom. As for a US response if an attack by the Assad regime is established, the president said "we would have to rethink the range of options that are available to us."  • The president called for the closing of the prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. "I continue to believe that we've got to close Guanatanamo," Obama said, but "Congress determined that they would not let us close it." Obama went to unusual (for him) length to explain how the prison hurts the reputation of the United States and tarnishes the US moral standing. "The idea that we would still detain forever a group of individuals that have not been tried, that is contrary to who we are, that is contrary to our interests and it has to stop," Obama said. • Obama said he's "confident" that Congress will pass an immigration reform bill and get it to him. "I've been impressed by the work that was done by the Group of 8 in the Senate," he said. • The president said Congressional Republicans were for sequestration before they were against it. As he did in his 1 March news conference, Obama blamed Congress for opting for the sequester instead of crafting a long-term solution to deficit woes. "You suggest that my job is to somehow get [Congress] to behave," Obama said. "That's their job." • Obama said the Boston bombings illustrate the danger of "self-radicalization" of possible terrorists inside the United States. That's as clear as anyone has been about how the government thinks the Tsarnaev brothers came to terrorism. Obama says he's challenged his counter-terror team to figure out what more can be done to prevent or identify self-radicalization. • Obama defended his trademark health insurance legislation, saying that delays in creating a federal health exchange and other implementation problems affect only 10-15% of Americans. For everyone else, "their only impact is that their insurance is stronger, better than it was before," Obama insisted. Is that how the public sees it? • The president praised NBA player Jason Collins for coming out as gay. "For I think a lot of young people out there who are gay or lesbian, who are struggling, to see a role model like that who's unafraid, I think it's a great thing," Obama said. Updated at 11.58am ET