5.47pm ET As today's testimony by attorney general Eric Holder ends, here's a summary of where things stand: • Holder repeatedly claimed not to know anything about the seizure of AP phone records but couldn't say exactly when and how he had recused himself from the case. He said his deputy James Cole had signed the subpoenas for the records. Holder's repeated claims that he could not address the case because of an "ongoing criminal investigation" were met with displeasure by members of the committee. Committee members called on Cole to appear and testify. • Though Holder faced the toughest questioning about the AP case, no broader criticism of the administration's handling of whistle-blowers or lack of transparency developed. In a party role reversal, many Republicans decried what they depicted as the government's abuse of the media, saying the department of justice had violated its own regulations in seizing the AP records. Holder said he didn't really know about the case. • Republicans, prominently including oversight committee chair Darrell Issa, used the hearing to attack Obama's labor secretary nominee, Tom Perez, while Democrats defended him. • Holder also faced repeated questions about the IRS targeting of conservative groups, the FBI handling of intelligence related to the Boston marathon bombings and the FBI investigation of the 2012 Benghazi attack. He took questions about sequestration, Guantanamo, Fast and Furious, abortion, voting rights, marijuana legalization, David Petraeus and Mitt Romney's taxes. • The hearing was contentious but Holder never looked cornered, and after four hours and change he didn't look all that tired. The strict five-minute time limit for each congress member, and the members' needs to get through cases relating to their local constituencies, gave the hearing a breathless, rapid-fire quality, in which any pressure on Holder from one member's attack seemed to repeatedly dissipate as the next questioner swerved to a radically different topic. Updated at 6.05pm ET