If you want to get a sense of the enfeebled and wanton state of the modern Republican party, there really is no better place to start than on the issue of Medicaid, the federal program that provides healthcare coverage for the poor. In a desperate effort to undermine the law they hate, Obamacare, Republican governors and state legislatures in half the states have either rejected or intend to reject a key part of the president's signature domestic initiative – namely, billions in federal dollars to extend Medicaid coverage to their poorest citizens. While Republicans argue they are acting out of highminded fiscal rectitude, the reality speaks to something else altogether – petulance and hyper-partisanship. Accepting billions in federal dollars and expanding care to the uninsured would mean tacitly accepting the reality of Obamacare. And that is tantamount to treason in the Republican party. So, as a result, when the law goes into full effect next year, millions of Americans will be left on the outside looking in, denied coverage for no other reason than the misfortune of residing in a red state. If we lived in a country where both major political parties shared a sense of social empathy, the Medicaid expansion piece of Obamacare would be among its least controversial provisions. Under the law, Medicaid coverage would become available for those living below 138% of the poverty line. The federal government would fully pick up the bill for the first few years of the law, and then eventually cover 90% of the costs. But when the US supreme court upheld Obamacare last year, it overturned the provision of the bill that gave the federal government authority to penalize states that did not agree to expand Medicaid coverage. Though this decision gave states the right potentially to reject the expansion, few at the time thought this would be an issue. Ron Pollack, director of the consumer group Families USA, expressed the views of many: "I think the states are going to pick this up. It would be an act of fiscal malpractice for states to turn this down." Considering the billions of Medicaid dollars that would be pumped into state coffers, it was hard to disagree. But what liberals had not fully countenanced was the continued refusal of Republicans to come to grips with Obamacare. Indeed, a year after the supreme court ruled on the legality of the law, congressional Republicans are continuing their futile struggle to scrap it. Earlier this month, House Republicans voted for the 37th time to repeal Obamacare. Beyond such peevish symbolic gestures congressional Republicans are trying to put as many roadblocks as possible in front of the healthcare law's rollout. They refuse to consider any technical corrections to the bill in order to assist with its implementation. Prominent Republicans, such as Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell, claim the bill is simply too broken to be fixed and repeal is the only option. But the unlikely possibility of repeal is a figleaf for the GOP's real interest: sabotaging the bill in order to gain a political advantage in the 2014 midterm elections. The more Obamacare is seen as a disaster, the better chance of voters punishing Democrats at the polls, or so the political argument goes. The problem is that this obstructionism is having real and enduing consequences. According to a survey maintained by the Kaiser Foundation (pdf), fewer than half the states have agreed to fully partake in the Medicaid expansion, with 20 not moving forward at this time. What do all these states have in common? Either a Republican governor or a legislature controlled by Republicans. In some states, even the support of a GOP governor has not been enough to bring along recalcitrant legislators. In Arizona, Governor Jan Brewer – no friend of the Obama administration – is locked in a heated battle with her state legislature over the issue and has threatened to veto every bill that comes to her desk until the Medicaid issue is resolved. In Florida, Rick Scott, who won election in large measure because of his opposition to Obamacare, said he couldn't deny uninsured Floridians the possibility of healthcare coverage – or the billions in federal dollars that would come from Medicaid expansion. But his GOP-controlled legislature has refused to go along. This means that of an estimated 1.3 million Floridians who should be covered under the new Medicaid rules, most will be denied coverage. It's the same depressing tale across much of red-state America – legislatures resisting expansion and its poorest citizens bearing the burden. One of the odder quirks of the current situation is that because Obamacare offers subsidies for purchasing insurance, those who make too much to qualify for Medicaid will be able to get coverage. Those too poor to qualify for a subsidy will not. While some states, like Iowa and Arkansas, have used this opportunity to negotiate better deals for their states with the federal government, the majority have simply chosen not to participate at all. This is not a small issue. In fact, it is a matter of life and death. A study published last year in the New England Journal of Medicine suggests that increased access to Medicaid results in fewer deaths. Other recent studies that looked at the impact of Medicaid expansion in Oregon found that while improvements in physical health were not yet evident, simply having coverage leads to better mental health and greatly reduced economic anxiety – which, at its core, is one of the main reasons people purchase insurance in the first place. These, however, have not been persuasive arguments for red-state Republicans. Some have argued that Medicaid is such a flawed program that poor people would be better-off having no coverage at all. But the most prevalent and widely stated criticism is that expansion will create huge new cost burdens for their states. This is a strange argument when one considers that the federal government is initially picking up the full tab, and then paying 90% of the benefits by 2020 and in the years afterward. But for prominent opponents like Will Weatherford, the speaker of the Florida House of Representatives who has led the charge against expansion in his state: "Given the track record of the federal government, which hasn't balanced a budget in years, I believe Florida will have to make hard choices that would potentially put future funding for our schools, public safety, and protection of our beaches and springs at risk and could mean increased taxes on hard-working Florida families." Others, like Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker and Texas Governor Rick Perry, argue that having more of their state's residents on Medicaid will perpetuate a "culture of dependency". Truth be told, there is little chance of that happening in Texas, which currently has one of the country's stingiest welfare programs and has repeatedly rejected federal money to expand healthcare for children. But the GOP's costs arguments are a red herring. According to one of the most comprehensive studies of the costs related to expansion, by the Urban Institute (pdf), the cost of adding new recipients to the rolls will be relatively small and some states will actually see net savings by reducing their already existing costs of providing care for the uninsured. Such data, however, is not doing much to sway the GOP rank and file, any more than the argument that state residents would likely be healthier and happier with healthcare coverage. None of this should be a surprise. During the Bush years, when Republicans also controlled Congress, little effort was made to pass healthcare reform – and certainly not universal care. Even today, the one-time GOP mantra of "repeal and replace" is now just "repeal". One can argue, of course, that this represents the party's ideological predisposition to resist any big government initiative, but that is perhaps even more of a reason to re-examine the underlying belief system. The fact is that even if we give the benefit of the doubt to claims of fiscal responsibility, and even if one were to accept the argument that Medicaid expansion would eventually impose "hard choices" on state legislatures, the fear of rising costs years down the road is not a valid reason to reject an opportunity to expand care for the most marginalized and vulnerable of the nation's fellow citizens. It's not as if money for expanded care couldn't be found via higher taxes or that Medicaid couldn't be made more effective – though those are proposals that Republicans have hardly been racing to embrace. What is perhaps most offensive about the GOP's opposition to Medicaid expansion is not just the heartlessness of it, but that a policy position based on dollars and cents at the cost of improving lives is actually considered reasonable. But in the modern Republican party, not only is a position that means more misfortune, anxiety, stress, poor health and early death seen as legitimate, but it's a badge of honor – and a popular one at that among the party's rank and file. The reality is that a significant number of Republican officeholders in red states have concluded that increasing the pain of low-income Americans and denying healthcare coverage is both appropriate and a political winner. Six months after a tough presidential race and with historically low favorability ratings, Republicans are searching for ways to rehabilitate their image. It ain't gonna be easy so long as they operate as though saving money – and keeping their ideological purity intact – is more important than reducing suffering and saving lives. • Editor's note: in several cases Medicare was referred to when Medicaid was intended; the article was amended at 10.45pm on 3 June. Tennessee was amended to Iowa as a state that has accepted the Medicaid expansion terms