US Senator Rand Paul. Photograph: Alex Wong/Getty Images A libertarian surveying the American political scene might recall the memorable line from A Tale of Two Cities: "It was the best of times, it was the worst of times." If you are a believer in limited government, there are daily reminders of what makes this the "worst of times". The Verizon phone records appear to be just the beginning of a federal global surveillance program ensnaring millions of Americans' personal data, the scope of which might make even former Vice President Dick Cheney blush. While the National Security Administration was snooping, the Internal Revenue Service was carefully scrutinizing organizations that disagree with Obama administration policies. One need not implicate the White House to see a pervasive and troubling political bias on the part of the hated tax-collecting agency. The Supreme Court has ruled that law enforcement can forcibly take DNA samples from people arrested but not yet convicted of any crimes, as if such swabs only convey as much information as fingerprinting or photographing. As Justice Antonin Scalia wrote in his dissent: "I doubt that the proud men who wrote the charter of our liberties would have been so eager to open their mouths for royal inspection." There have been recent reductions in the projected annual budget deficit and federal spending growth. But even that is only in comparison to the bloated post-2008 levels. Washington is expected to spend more than $3.8tn, a little over a decade after the first federal budget to cross the $2tn threshold. But all this appears to have triggered a libertarian backlash that could – with a little political momentum and a lot of luck – usher in the best of times for the anti-statist ideology. Though most clearly felt in Republican circles, this backlash transcends political party. The Republican Party has perhaps its most visible libertarian wing ever, led by Kentucky Senator Rand Paul and a small group of congressmen like Michigan Representative Justin Amash and Paul's fellow Kentuckian Representative Thomas Massie. Paul has gone so far as to argue that a more libertarian GOP could win back voters turned off by the party's Bush-era stands on foreign policy, civil liberties, and some social issues. Paul's father, former congressman Ron Paul, already received more than 2 million votes in the 2012 Republican primaries, with particularly strong showings in the crucial early states of Iowa and New Hampshire. Just as importantly, the elder Paul raised over $40m and inspired organizations like Campaign for Liberty and Young Americans for Liberty to follow in his footsteps. The younger Paul seems to have had more influence on Capitol Hill's Tea Party conservatives. Senator Mike Lee, a conservative Republican from Utah, has joined him in criticizing the Patriot Act. Texas Senator Ted Cruz was another high-profile participant in Paul's anti-drone filibuster in March. Although the GOP has scored the first political points against the Obama administration's continuity with Bush national security policies, there are plenty of Democrats who are quietly displeased. The surveillance issue may prompt them to speak up. Already, the first sustained demonstration of progressive disenchantment with the president has come from the civil libertarian left. The Libertarian party has even achieved some minor success. Its 2012 presidential nominee, former New Mexico Governor Gary Johnson, received nearly 1.3 million votes, a record for the 42-year-old third party. Libertarian candidates arguably played the spoiler in several key congressional races last November. A Rasmussen poll found that 59% of the American people opposed the federal government's secret collection of telephone records. An even higher percentage suspected other federal agencies of engaging in behavior similar to the IRS' toward conservative groups. Combine all this with lingering opposition to Obamacare and a libertarian moment could be arriving. "Could" is the operative word. Past revolts against the leviathan have petered out for a variety of reasons. Government programs are much easier to oppose in the abstract than to actually reverse in practice. The voters themselves tend to become much more risk-adverse when the retrenchment of big government seems like a real possibility. Finally, individualists are a fractious bunch. Full-spectrum libertarians have little political experience and even less tolerance for the work of actual legislating and policymaking. Conservatives tend to be very selective anti-statists, particularly when rewarded with political power. It is hard to persuade the people who hold the levers of government power to surrender their authority. It is even more difficult to sustain 1994 or 2010-like electoral revolts after the newly elected rebels experience their first failures. Nevertheless, the breakneck growth of government presents an opportunity for liberty advocates. Or as Charles Dickens might put it, the libertarians' winter of despair may yet give way to a spring of hope.