John Boehner and Republican leadership discuss the immigration bill on Capitol Hill. Photograph: Drew Angerer/Getty Images Barack Obama will meet the architects of a Senate bill that promises sweeping immigration reform on Thursday, amid signs that their ambitious proposals are starting to unravel in the face of opposition from conservative Republicans. House Republican leaders criticised what they called the "flawed" legislation on Wednesday, rejecting the kind of wholescale reform that would enable a pathway to citizenship for 11 million undocumented workers. In a strongly worded statement issued after a closed-door meeting of Republican representatives, the leaders rejected the kind of overarching reform proposed by the Senate and backed by Obama. "The American people want our border secured, our laws enforced, and the problems in our immigration system fixed to strengthen our economy," they said. "But they don't trust a Democrat-controlled Washington, and they're alarmed by the president's ongoing insistence on enacting a single, massive, Obamacare-like bill rather than pursuing a step-by-step, common-sense approach to actually fix the problem." Republican representatives, led by House speaker John Boehner, are now expected to propose their own, piecemeal changes, focusing on beefing up border security. There may also be an attempt to provide a path to citizenship to immigrants who were brought to the US illegally as children. But they will not contemplate any wholesale transformation of immigration rules that they believe would equate to an amnesty for illegal immigrants. The meeting in the Capitol was the House Republicans' first such gathering since the Senate approved sweeping legislation last month on a bipartisan vote of 68-32. With the prospects of significant legislative change in the next few weeks receding, Obama was scheduled to meet Republican John McCain and Democrat Chuck Schumer, the two senators who composed the bill, to discuss the situation in the oval office. The president could be poised to adopt a more proactive approach in the weeks to come as he seeks to salvage a key plank of his legislative agenda. The White House, which hopes immigration reform will be one of the pillars of Obama's second term, released a report this week arguing that passing major immigration reforms such as the Senate's would expand the economy 3.3% by 2023 and reduce the federal deficit by almost $850bn over 20 years. Surveys indicate that US voters broadly support changes to immigration laws which they recognise as flawed. On Thursday, pollsters Gallup said that Americans are more supportive of immigration today than at any point in the recent past. However, Republicans remain divided on the issue. Hostility is concentrated among House Republicans from conservative strongholds, for whom there is little if any electoral gain in backing immigration reform. In contrast, senior Republican strategists perceive reform as a crucial step toward broadening the wider party's appeal among Hispanic voters, a growing base likely to be pivotal in future presidential elections. Obama took more than 70% of their votes in winning a second term last year. In a rare intervention on Wednesday, former President George W Bush called on Congress to reach an agreement. "I don't intend to get involved in the politics or the specifics of policy, but I do hope there's a positive resolution to the debate," he said during a naturalisation ceremony at his presidential library in Dallas. "And I hope, during the debate, we keep a benevolent spirit in mind, and we understand the contributions immigrants make to our country." Bush's intervention did not appear to have had much impact on Capitol Hill. "We care what people back home say, not what some former president says," said Republican representative Tim Huelskamp, one of the more trenchant critics of the Senate bill. Despite Republican opposition, and likely delays to any legislation, observers are cautioning against writing off the kind of comprehensive reform that Obama, the Senate and many US voters appear to want. Thomas Donohue, president of the US Chamber of Commerce, which wants comprehensive immigration reforms, said public support would prompt House Republicans to eventually back a major bill. "If the arguments are compelling, this deal is not over by any means," he said.