US elections: voters in Georgia on Super Tuesday primary day. Photograph: Stephen Morton/Getty Americans, as a whole, are justifiably disgusted with the partisan gridlock that bogs down federal legislation. At the state and local level, they see state legislatures increasingly at odds with governors. But is any side winning? Activists on both sides point to dramatic legal threats to one cause or another as proof that the troops must be rallied because America is under assault. We are either a country slipping into a swamp of socialism and secular humanist sin (see: Obamacare, overturning the Defense of Marriage Act), or we are on the verge of institutionalizing gender discrimination and doing nothing as a shock wave of gun violence terrorizes children (see: abortion law fights in Texas and Ohio, the failure of gun background check bill). Both sides have some cause to be worried, but it's a failure of the current political climate that at least part of the problem is that we rarely see these two sides matched face-to-face for any sort of decisive referendum. Yes, there are elections every year. But there are two entirely different electorates that turn out for those elections. There is the presidential year electorate that you've probably heard about: the diverse and young population, who, along with single women, put Obama over the top in a tough economic climate. They are generally OK with gay marriage, Obamacare and immigration. Then there is the off-year electorate: older, whiter, more conservative. They produce the statehouses where anti-abortion regulations simmer, and give states the right-wing governors who then face sweeping recall efforts of their legislation (or themselves) and stomach-turning unpopularity – as has happened in Ohio, Wisconsin, and Pennsylvania. They want closed borders and non-union state workers and teachers. In some ways, the fate of the country – where it is between the two alarmist poles staked out by activists – lies in creating a contest wherein these electorates actually meet. We need an ideological cage match, and every off year, there are hopes that this will be the one: a cruicible of political will that can tip us off as to which way the country is really tipping. This is all by way of saying, let's get some more discussion about 2014 around here. There are plenty of people weighing in on the horse race aspects – who will gain control, etc. But I'm more interested in the ideas that get stirred up and the populations that get engaged. I've been speaking to analysts (both professional consultants and opinion writers) about what's getting their attention along those lines. With the usual caveats that it's too early to say much specifically, supportes of parties agreed on more than you'd think: most surprising was Republican operatives admitting that some pet issues of the past year may not spark excitement outside the grassroots fringe. The IRS scandal, Benghazi, sequestration, even Obamacare and immigration reform are staples of Fox News and talk radio and could definitely bring out supporters, but probably only those already likely to vote. I heard doubt that these issues might even fade before the primary races, though there's a couple of big exceptions having to do with immigration. The coming battle between current Colorado Governor John Hickenlooper (a Democrat) and former Representative Tom Tancredo (Republican Tancredo made "closing the borders" the centerpiece of his doomed presidential run in 2008), and the possibility that Republican Senator Lindsey "Grahamnesty" Graham will face a primary challenger in South Carolina. What will matter? As I've suggested before: reproductive rights, a topic that's never gone away but that many politicians have considered themselves fortunate to escape speaking much about. It's a losing issue for both sides, in some ways: pro-life politicians are rightly wary of stepping into what they see as unrelated women's equality issues (or just knowledge-about-women issues), and pro-choice politicians do not want to seem "extreme" on an issue that is unsettling for so many. But even before we get into the meaning of a Rick Perry presidential run, abortion regulation will be foregrounded in the Ohio governor's race (where John Kasich just signed restrictive legislation) and likely to surface in Wisconsin, where Scott Walker signed a heavily restrictive bill that's gone under the radar as Texas, Ohio, and North Carolina get media attention. A fascinating wild card mentioned by both teams: the revelations about the National Security Administration's prying into the communications of American citizens. The polling on the issue is schizophrenic and doesn't line up easily in a way that obviously benefits either parties, but as the stories keep coming – and lacking the context of an intense military engagement or specific attack – it may be an issue that candidates can't ignore. Imagine that: a policy debate that doesn't lend itself to easy partisan exploitation. Individual candidates will have to carve out their own positions on the topic, making room for a flavor of libertarianism that would not necessarily be represented by the Paul (aka Rand and Ron) family.