In today's broken Washington, it's hard to think of any matter of importance that could win a near-unanimous senate vote. But 20 years ago this Saturday, on 3 August 1993, the upper house voted by a margin of 96-3 to confirm Ruth Bader Ginsburg as the 107th justice of the US supreme court. Ginsburg was then a federal appeals judge, but earlier in her career, she had been a litigator for the American Civil Liberties Union who had fought and won the most important women's rights cases of the age. Only the second woman ever nominated to the top bench, Ginsburg was also the first judge proposed by a Democratic president since the civil rights titan Thurgood Marshall in 1967. When Bill Clinton introduced her to the nation in the White House rose garden, he proudly called her "the Thurgood Marshall of gender equality law". Outspoken, plucky and unashamedly feminist, Ginsburg was nothing like more recent judicial nominees with short paper trails and no discernible opinions – and still, she sailed through. It was another time, and Ginsburg knows it. In 2011, she told a group of law students that she would probably not get onto the high court if she were nominated now: Today my ACLU connection would probably disqualify me. A lot else has changed in America in the two decades since Ruth Bader Ginsburg arrived at One First Street in DC. Yet as both the court and the country have drifted to the right, Ginsburg has only grown in power and in visibility. As President Barack Obama and congressional Democrats seek elusive compromise with an implacably opposed Republican party, and as public opinion increasingly admits rightwing and nativist views that would have been anathema a generation ago, Ginsburg has stood firm. And in the process, she has become, for my money, the single greatest figure in American political life. Now the de facto leader of the court's liberal bloc, she has masterminded victories on issues from affirmative action to gay rights to executive power. She has become adept at peppering her statements and opinions with bons mots that ripple through the media: trashing John Roberts' argument that Obamacare would lead to mandatory vegetable consumption as "the broccoli horrible", or calling DOMA-affected gay unions "a skim-milk marriage". Even her dissents, not infrequent given the court's rightward shift, carry weight. Her justifiably infuriated dissent this June, when Roberts and company eviscerated the Voting Rights Act, highlighted the unprecedented nature of the conservative bloc's activism. Her lone dissent in the past term's affirmative action case, in which she compared her opponents to ostriches with their heads in the sand, provides a road map for a defense of racial equality in schools. And the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act, the first bill Obama signed into law, is essentially her doing. After the court rejected Ledbetter's claim to be awarded back pay after she discovered wage discrimination, Ginsburg penned a scathing dissent that suggested how Congress could implement a solution. They followed her almost to the letter. She is 80 years old. She is only 5-foot-1 and 100lb (45.4kg). Her tiny voice, with its unmistakable Brooklynese lilt, sometimes gets drowned out by loudmouthed justices on the other side of the bench. But make no mistake: Ruth Bader Ginsburg is a colossus. Obama loves to intone that history naturally tends toward progressive ends – but Ginsburg, by contrast, understands that history can absolutely start rolling in the other direction, and that political progress requires a constant struggle. Her strength and conviction are so rare today that Ginsburg is now the object of adoration of an unlikely fan club, with obsessive blogs celebrating the "Notorious RBG" or the "Real Bad Gangsta". This 20th anniversary, however, has brought out a few Job's comforters. Before the 2012 election, a chorus of liberal-leaning writers begged her to step down, lest a President Romney replace her with an archconservative who would lock down the court's right shift in perpetuity. This anniversary year they are back, mixing their mazel tovs with suggestions that she pack her backs for a retirement community in Boca Raton. "It's time for Ruth Bader Ginsburg to step down", one Salon writer insisted in March; a Washington Post blogger said the same last month. A few TV blowhards have been trying to get her to go as well, all of them insisting that it's for her own good. It's true that the presidency is up for grabs in three years; the senate, which confirms or rejects nominees, could have a Republican majority in just 18 months. And I am as fearful as the next leftie that our extremely conservative supreme court could tip even further into the abyss. But the calls for Ginsburg to go underestimate both her own particular skills, which can't be replicated by a random Obama replacement, as well as her own mastery of the current political terrain. To assume that Ginsburg does not know what she is doing with her own career is not just offensive but clueless. It minimizes both her accomplishments and her continued potential. And it suggests that even at 80, even at the pinnacle of American juridical power, she is somehow too stupid to know how the game is played – and I don't know how anyone who has watched Ginsburg these past few years could believe that. Even the concerns about her fitness are overstated. A notorious workaholic, she is by her own assessment the hardest-working member of the high court; one of her clerks reminisced that "Justice Ginsburg could accomplish more between 10pm and midnight than I could all day." When SCOTUSBlog crunched the numbers on this year's term (PDF), it found that Ginsburg is by far the most efficient justice, turning out her opinions on average 60 days after oral argument. Roberts, the next most efficient justice, is a full 26 days slower. Although she is now the oldest justice on the court, it's not by such a great margin; Antonin Scalia and Anthony Kennedy are only three years younger. And compared to them, Ginsburg has the fortitude of a triathlete. She has had cancer twice – first colon cancer, then pancreatic cancer – but both times she was back on the bench in no time. Her husband died in 2010; she was in court a day later. Last year, she injured several ribs just before the court's big Obamacare decision but refused to take time off. This past May she injured her ribs again, and powered through the pain. She is pumping iron, working out in the Supreme Court gym with a personal trainer who used to be an army parachutist. "When I started," Ginsburg told one reporter, "I looked like a survivor of Auschwitz." Now she does dozens of pushups and lifts weights – and, according to the New Yorker's Jeffrey Toobin, Stephen Breyer has to dial the machines to a lower resistance setting after she's finished with them. She may be small, but she isn't frail; she is as tough as they come. So as difficult as this may be for some Washington chuckleheads, the right thing do is trust Ginsburg that she knows what she's doing. In an interview last month with the veteran Supreme Court reporter Joan Biskupic, Ginsburg wearily acknowledged earlier efforts to force her into retirement, predicting, "That's going to start up again." But she has no plans to go: It really has to be, 'am I equipped to do the job?'… I was so pleased that this year I couldn't see that I was slipping in any respect. Her new model, she says, is John Paul Stevens, who retired at 90. She is at the height of her powers. By her own prediction she will not be replaced by someone with a similar record, a sensible view given Obama's noted caution with judicial nominees. Give her time. This country will be far poorer when Ruth Bader Ginsburg goes – and if she thinks her work isn't done yet, I'm inclined to believe her.