Cory Booker casts his ballot in the New Jersey Democratic primary election for the US Senate. Photograph: Eduardo Munoz/Reuters Cory Booker has won the Democratic primary for United States senator from New Jersey. But what's up next? Booker must first win the general election on 16 October to become senator. That is likely going to happen. A Republican hasn't been elected to the Senate from New Jersey since Clifford Case in 1972. The last person to come close was Bob Franks in 2000. Franks was a moderate Republican who was supported by the Log Cabin Republicans. He was against banning gay adoptions in Washington, DC. He also benefitted greatly from the perception that his Democratic opponent Jon Corzine was trying to by the race with his own money. This belief was so widely held that the normally pro-Democratic New York Times actually endorsed Franks. Still, Franks came up 3pt short. The odds are far longer for Republican nominee Steve Lonegan. Lonegan is anything but moderate. He is pro-life, anti-gay marriage, supports a full repeal of Obamacare and uses the phrase "illegal alien amnesty" to describe those undocumented immigrants hoping for a pathway to citizenship. The polling reflects Booker's advantage over Lonegan. Booker is ahead by nearly 20pt in an average of the last three polls. Just as importantly, he is over 50%. That means that even if every single undecided voter went for Lonegan, Booker would still win by about 5pt. Chances are, however, that undecideds will break proportionally to those already decided. If that were to happen, Booker would win by about 20pt. Once Booker wins, he'll enter an elective body that has, historically, prided itself on seniority. That might prove difficult for a new junior senator. We should not expect him to make a grand opening as an ideological bomb-thrower, a la Ted Cruz. The record does not support it. Booker's record, in any case, is as a moderate liberal. He's been someone who is liberal on social issues, while centrist on financial issues. You can see this in his strongly pro-gay rights history, even as he's maintained close ties to the financial industry. You might remember Booker not being a big fan of President Obama's attacks on Mitt Romney's former private equity firm, Bain Capital. Per ontheissues.org, Booker's public statements most closely mirror those of his mentor, former New Jersey Senator Bill Bradley. It was Bradley who reformed the tax code in 1986 and favored merit pay for teachers, which nearly cost him re-election in 1990. Booker, like Bradley, is also in favor of merit pay. Booker would, therefore, probably be right in the middle of the Democratic caucus. In a more recent context, this would place him slightly to the right of then junior Senator Barack Obama of Illinois. Booker is more moderate on economic issues. That said, it isn't Booker's style to stay quiet. He isn't likely to put his nose to the grindstone and table pieces of legislation that please your tax accountant and nobody else. This is a man who thrives on the affection of fans on Twitter, who runs into buildings that are on fire, who likes to be heard. So, if Booker isn't going to make very liberal comments or pass very progressive legislation, then how will he make his presence felt? He'll do what Obama promised to do when running for president: reach across the aisle. Booker has a history of wheeling and dealing with Republicans. He's buddy-buddy with New Jersey Governor Chris Christie. He's worked with Republicans on school vouchers. As NBC's First Read noted last week, Booker could very well work with someone like Republican Senator Rand Paul on legislation. Both have a libertarian bent. Perhaps, it will be on education or prison reform. Between them, they have massive social media followings, which they could leverage to upset the old guard in the Senate. Of course, a lot of this easier said than done. Jay Newton-Small analyzes that Booker will get "a backbench seat in a hated institution where he'll be expected to dim his wattage, at least in the short term". Thus, we should expect Cory Booker to make more noise than the average junior senator, but he'll probably be more contained than he has been as the Twitter-friendly mayor of Newark. But the sure bet at this point is that Booker will be a senator.