Bupa is one of two providers that dominate the private healthcare market. Photograph: Bupa/PA Capitalists are always and everywhere the enemies of capitalism. Without efficient regulation of markets they force up prices and undermine quality in their search for profits and power. With Wednesday's report on the state of private healthcare, the Competition Commission has once again illustrated how the deficiencies in market forces and regulation in private healthcare have ensured that customers do not get good value for money. The main problem here is lack of transparency. As Obamacare is rolled out in the US, the major problem the new healthcare system has had to grapple with is that a wide range of prices is being charged for similar treatments across the States. In the UK there have been some attempts to improve pricing availability and uniformity for insured and self-paying customers. However, these increasingly public prices are – according to the Competition Commission – too high and offer excessive returns on capital. Sadly, the private insurance industry has failed to use its purchasing power to ensure consumer protection, even though it is dominated by two companies, the Bupa and Axa, with considerable potential buying power. This is characteristic of private and public healthcare markets. Providers tend to dominate trade, with purchasers being passive price and quality takers and providers being active price and quality makers. This dominance of providers over purchasers of care is in part a product of restrictive practices used by the medical profession and private hospitals to protect and enhance their earnings. An example of this market manipulation is the use of "loyalty" payments to doctors to refer patients to particular hospitals, at times for unnecessary care. The absence of transparency essential for the efficient working of the market is particularly evident with regard to providing evidence of good quality care for patients. It remains astonishing that volume and outcome data for practitioners in the private sector are not reported publicly and integrated with NHS data. Such data is essential to review variations in clinical practice and to deal with outliers who are potentially damaging patients' health. Bupa confronted this problem when a Kent gynaecological surgeon, Rodney Ledward, damaged dozens of patients with poor clinical practice. Part of his workload was carried out in a Bupa hospital in Canterbury: Bupa has since sold all its hospitals. Its response to the Ledward scandal was to introduce patient reported outcome measures (Proms) in 1998. Proms systems collect physical and psychological data from patients before an operation and after it. This facilitates identification of poor patient care and offers improved patient protection. The NHS finally emulated this good practice in 2009. Private hospital providers have been kept in business by NHS contracts. The private insurance market has shrunk in recent years because of the economic downturn – in addition, more customers are self-payers. This has left private hospitals with capacity to seek NHS contracts, as government offered more choice to state-funded patients. Without this government revenue, the private hospital sector would have shrunk considerably. The efficiency of this NHS contracting is worthy of scrutiny. For instance, the Labour government's initial investment in independent sector treatment centres (ISTCs) was grossly wasteful because of guarantees of payment even when treatment volumes were not reached. The Competition Commission report illustrates these problems quite well and proposes to force sales of some hospitals in an effort to increase local competition. Predictably, the owners of private hospitals are outraged and the insurers are delighted to have support for improved pricing practices. Pricing transparency and the avoidance of excess returns on capital are an essential part of customer protection. However, that has to be complemented with improved transparency in the quality of patient care. This can only be better achieved by integrating patient outcome data, which would enable insurers and the NHS to identify deficient outliers and ensure good quality care. Sadly private sector capitalists and public sector policy makers seem incapable of implementing these essential policies.