8.46am BST Welcome to Middle East Live. US Secretary of State John Kerry is due to meet his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, for talks in Geneva on a plan to place Syria's chemical weapons under international control. Here's a round up of the latest developments: • The US has welcomed what it called "very specific" Russian proposals to secure the handover of Syria's chemical weapons before key talks in Geneva on Thursday. The White House urged patience and said it was increasingly confident that its Kremlin partners were acting in good faith by "putting their prestige on the line". "We have seen more co-operation from Russia in the last two days than we have heard in the last two years," said White House spokesman Jay Carney. • Russia has proposed a four-stage plan for Syria to hand over its weapons, according to AFP citing the Russian daily Kommersant. Under the plan Syria would: Join the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons [OPCW] the body that upholds the international ban Disclose the location of chemical stockpiles Allow OPCW inspectors access to the sites Destroy the stockpile of weapons • The five permanent UN security council members have met in New York to discuss the Russian plan, the BBC reports. US, UK and French diplomats held separate talks before the meeting of the so-called P5 envoys. The meeting lasted less than an hour and envoys declined to comment as they left. The French have already been working on a draft resolution that would be enforced by Chapter VII of the UN charter, which would in effect sanction the use of force if Syria failed in its obligations. However, Russia has already indicated that this would be unacceptable, as would any resolution blaming the Syrian government for chemical attacks. • Russia's leader Vladimir Putin has drawn a contrast between what he portrayed as Russia's diplomatic approach to Syria and the Obama administration's talk of military intervention. He also claimed Barack Obama's talk of US exceptionalism was "dangerous". Writing in the New York Times he warned:  It is alarming that military intervention in internal conflicts in foreign countries has become commonplace for the United States. Is it in America's long-term interest? I doubt it ... From the outset, Russia has advocated peaceful dialogue enabling Syrians to develop a compromise plan for their own future. We are not protecting the Syrian government, but international law. We need to use the United Nations Security Council and believe that preserving law and order in today’s complex and turbulent world is one of the few ways to keep international relations from sliding into chaos. We must stop using the language of force and return to the path of civilized diplomatic and political settlement. • UN inspectors investigating last month's chemical attack east of Damascus have compiled enough circumstantial evidence to suggest the Assad regime was responsible, diplomats have told Foreign Policy's The Cable blog. "You can conclude from the type of evidence the [identity of the] author," one said. • The US shift from planning an attack on the Assad regime to diplomacy has prompted despair and anger among rebels in Aleppo, Martin Chulov reports from the city.  The rebels of the north held out hope that real help would arrive some time. "We were depending on this," said Sheikh Omar Otthman, a leader of the Liwa al-Tawheed brigade, the main opposition militia in Aleppo, of the now uncertain international intervention. "The suffering of the people of Ghouta could have created an opportunity for all our suffering to be lifted" ... "They've spent the past two weeks saying Bashar is a liar and must be punished and that he needs to know that he can't get away with what he does," said Abu Hamza, a former colonel in the Syrian military who became a central figure in the war for the north soon after it began. "And then they give him a chance to do more of what he has always done, get away with murder. He will stall them, trick them and wear them down. And they will send the ships home. And we'll be left alone." Updated at 11.25am BST