House GOP leaders are looking to reverse course and agree to tea party demands to block implementation of Obama's health care law Photo: J Scott Applewhite/AP Republicans announced a last-ditch budget showdown with Barack Obama on Wednesday, threatening imminent votes that could paralyse the government within weeks if the president doesn't postpone his flagship healthcare initiative, cut taxes and permit the Keystone oil pipeline. Bowing to pressure from his conservative wing, House speaker John Boehner said Republicans would pass a budget bill on Friday that included measures to withhold funding from the Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare. Both the White House and congressional Democrats however are refusing to blink, raising the prospect of a partial federal government shutdown when current funding arrangements run out at the end of this month. The Democrat-dominated Senate is expected to reject the House budget and send it back without the healthcare ransom, giving Republicans in the lower chamber one last chance to step back from the brink and agree what is usually a routine extension of government spending permits. But raising the stakes even higher, House majority leader Eric Cantor told a packed press conference on Capitol Hill that Republicans would also link Obamacare to separate negotiations to extend the US debt ceiling, adding the prospect of theoretical default on government debt repayments to the high-stakes game of bluff. Cantor said the Republicans would add further demands for tax reform and White House permission for the environmentally-controversial Keystone pipeline to their negotiations over the debt ceiling. Speaking shortly after the list of demands was unveiled on Capitol Hill, Obama looked visibly irritated at a roundtable meeting with business leaders in Washington and repeated that he would not negotiate with House Republicans. "You have never seen in the history of the United States the debt ceiling, or the threat of not raising the debt ceiling, being used to extort a president of a governing party, and trying to force issues that have nothing to do with the budget and have nothing to do with the debt," he said. Obama said he was open to negotiating the budget but would refused to "create a habit, a pattern, whereby the full faith and credit of the United States ends up being a bargaining chip to set policy. It is irresponsible. That last time we did this in 2011 we had negative growth at a time when the recovery was just trying to take off." He added: "Raising the debt ceiling does not increase our debt, does not somehow promote profligacy. All it does is it says: you've got pay for the bills you've already racked up Congress. It is a basic function to ensure the fall faith and credit of the US is preserved." He argued Republicans were playing politics and threatening to "blow the whole thing up", default on the debt "and cause a worldwide financial crisis". Boehner insisted that such tactics were legitimate ways for Republicans to seek influence over government spending, which they say has run out of control. "For decades Congress has used the debt limit to cut spending; this year is going to be no different," he said, throwing down the gauntlet to the Senate, which will have to vote on whether to accept the House budget bill. "There should be no conversation about shutting the government down. That's not the goal here. Our goal here is to cut spending and to protect the American people from Obamacare. It's as simple as that. There's no interest in our part in shutting the government down." "I am not going to predict what the Senate will do," added Boehner when asked what would happen if the House budget was rejected. But Boehner appeared to acknowledge he had been forced into the stand-off by more radical members of his party. Asked if the decision to directly link defunding Obamacare with the budget negotiations was something he was personally in favour of, he smiled and said: "We have got a lot of divergent opinion in the caucus but the key is to listen." Speaking after the press conference, Boehner's aides were adamant that the House leadership had always planned to attack Obamacare during the budget negotiation, even if a direct linkage in one bill was not made until today. Majority whip Kevin McCarthy insisted there was plenty of appetite in the party for a final showdown over the budget and debt ceiling. "I have not watched our conference so united as we walked into this battle," he said. "You are going to see a very big excitement coming in the next weeks." Previous battles between Republicans and Obama over fiscal policy have been averted in recent months by last-minute deals, but these appear to have weakened the GOP leadership and left the initiative with an increasingly dominant Tea Party wing in House.