Speaker John Boehner celebrates after the passage of a bill to defund Obamacare. Photograph: Alex Wong/Getty Images Republicans in Congress have placed the US on a path to a potentially calamitous government shutdown over the federal budget, after voting through a measure on Friday that makes the continuing funding of the government contingent upon an attempt to derail Barack Obama's signature healthcare initiative. Leaders in the Republican-dominated House of Representatives immediately called on the Senate to back the bill, which would keep up government spending until mid-December but also withdraw funding for the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare. Democrats opposed the vote, arguing in a debate beforehand that Republicans were threatening to deny resources to vital agencies and playing a high-risk game that could place the entire US economy in jeopardy. The resolution is expected to be blocked next week by leaders in the Democratic Senate; Obama has already said he will veto any such measure. Obama, reacting to the vote during a speech at a Ford plant in Kansas City, said Republicans in Congress were "holding the whole country hostage". "They're focused on politics, they're focused on trying to mess with me. They're not focused on you," he told the audience. "They want to threaten default, just to make sure than tens of millions of Americans continue not to have healthcare." Immediately after the vote, Republican leaders spoke at a rowdy but orchestrated rally in the House. "The American people don't want a government shutdown and they don't want Obamacare," said the Republican Speaker of the House, John Boehner, who earlier this week bowed to pressure from the Republicans' Tea Party wing, which has been hungry to continue its long battle with the White House over healthcare reforms. "The House has listened to the American people," Boehner said. "Now is the time for the US Senate to listen to them as well." Kevin McCarthy, the Republican majority whip, declared that the House vote had been "bipartisan". In fact, the vote was as partisan as most on Capitol Hill had expected, sticking almost entirely to party lines and passing by 230 votes to 189. Just two Democrats and one Republican rebelled against their whips. Boehner and other Republican leaders spoke at a podium emblazoned with the hashtag #SenateMustAct and with House members lined up behind them, cheering and hollering. But the political show in the House masked the reality of a split legislature. Democrats control the Senate, and leaders there have already indicated that they plan to strip out the requirement in the bill to defund Obamacare, before sending it back to the House. Senate Democrats held with their own press conference after the vote. "In case there is any shred of doubt in the minds of our House counterparts, I want to be absolutely crystal clear: any bill that defunds Obamacare is dead," said Senate majority leader Harry Reid. Democrat Chuck Schumer said the Senate would not give into the Republicans' high-stakes gamble. "We will not blink," he said. "Don't get it into your heads that we will. We won't." There are just 10 days before the end of the federal fiscal year, after which government departments will run out of money. A showdown is expected to dominate Washington throughout next week. Earlier, Boehner hinted that discussions would still be ongoing "next weekend", suggesting that he expects the brinkmanship to be overcome with an eleventh-hour deal. The House resolution temporarily extends government funding, until 15 December. House Republicans are also threatening to refuse to extend US borrowing limits when they are breached, in mid-October, unless other concessions such as tax reform and oil pipeline permits are granted. Obama has said he will veto the bill, if necessary. The White House has made provisions ahead of a partial shutdown of federal agencies, focusing on non-urgent spending. However the consequences of a failure to reach an agreement over the next week could be far-reaching. Economists are warning that the danger of a government shutdown or debt default could seriously damage the US, with ripples potentially impacting the wider global economy. The Wall Street Journal editorial board warned of the Republican strategy: "Kamikaze missions rarely turn out well, least of all for the pilots." However, House Republicans, whose agenda has been set by the conservative wing of the GOP, and who have been a thorn in the side of the Obama administration, are unperturbed. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, chair of the House Republican conference, declared Friday's vote a victory "for moms and dads and families and seniors across the country". Earlier, during the debate, the House Majority Leader, Eric Cantor, said the resolution was intended to fight for the interests of constituents. "Let's defund this law now and protect the American people from the economic calamity that we know Obamacare will create," he said. The Democratic minority leader, Nancy Pelosi, lambasted the Republicans. "This place is a mess," she said. "What is brought to the floor today is without a doubt a measure designed to shut down government."