Scott Walker, governor of Wisconsin, could seek the Republican presidential nomination in 2016. Photograph: Zhang Baoping/Xinhua Press/Corbis Scott Walker, the governor of Wisconsin who is among potential contenders for the Republican presidential nomination in 2016, on Saturday sounded a skeptical note over the prospect of a government shutdown caused by GOP attempts to defund President Obama's signature healthcare reform. "The government we have should work, so that's why I don't believe we should shut the government down," Walker told reporters after speaking at a Republican conference in Michigan at which Republican divisions over the correct approach to "Obamacare" are clearly illustrated. The governor of Michigan, Rick Snyder, who is hosting the state Republican conference, said the prospect of shutdown "reflects poorly on the national political culture". Two other 2016 prospects, Louisiana governor Bobby Jindal and Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky, also planned to speak on Saturday. Paul and Jindal are attempting to create some daylight between themselves and their would-be rivals. Paul called a shutdown "a dumb idea" but said the fight about it was worth having. "I am for the debate, I am for fighting," he said. "I don't want to shut the government down, though. I think that's a bad solution." Jindal, who opposes the healthcare law, has said it is a bad idea to take any option off the table, including a government shutdown. "I don't think as a party we should negotiate with ourselves," he said. Jindal also said this week that "the party needs to be more than the party of 'no'." Jeb Bush, the former governor of Florida, has been more pointed in his skepticism. Noting that Republicans control only the House of Representatives, or "one-half of one-third of the leverage" in Washington, Bush said there "needs to be an understanding of that, or, politically, it gets quite dicey". Other potential contenders are clear in their opposition to Obamacare. Senator Ted Cruz of Texas says he will fight "with every breath" to stop it, even if that means shutting down parts of the federal government. Senator Marco Rubio of Florida and others also say they are making a principled stand, willing to oppose the law at all costs. On Friday, the Republican-controlled House of Representatives passed a short-term spending plan that would continue funding government operations until mid-December while withholding money for implementing the health law. Some Republican lawmakers also advocate holding back on increasing the nation's borrowing limit, which could result in a first-ever default, unless the law is brought down. President Obama used his weekly address on Saturday to scold "a faction on the far right" of the Republican Party, and said he would not allow "anyone to harm this country's reputation or threaten to inflict economic pain on millions of our own people, just to make an ideological point". Less than one-quarter of Americans approve of the job Congress is doing, about the same as approve of Republicans in Congress, according to recent national polls. Democrats poll slightly higher, and large majorities disapprove of the work of both. Cruz, however, said concerns that voters would blame Republicans for a shutdown are unfounded. "If history is a guide, the fear of deep political repercussions I don't think the data bear that out," he said.