Police outside the US consulate in Hong Kong. Photograph: Alex Hofford/EPA Hong Kong is unlikely to offer Edward Snowden a permanent refuge, but the NSA whistleblower could buy time by filing an asylum request, thanks to a landmark legal ruling that has thrown the system into disarray, a legal expert says. For years, Hong Kong has relied on the United Nations refugee agency to handle the bulk of claims. But in March its court of final appeal ruled that the government must independently screen cases. "No system has been proposed to implement the court's decision as of yet. Until such a system is in place, persons with a bona fide refugee claim cannot be removed," said Simon Young, director of the centre for comparative and public law at the University of Hong Kong. A request on the grounds of persecution might in theory be an option for Snowden. "But it seems unlikely [to be approved] if there was going to be a fair trial and anything short of the death penalty," he said. In the one area where Hong Kong decided asylum claims itself before March – torture cases – it approved only one or two out of thousands, Young said. Link to video: NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden: 'I don't want to live in a society that does these sort of things' Snowden has said his predisposition is to seek asylum in a country with "shared values", citing Iceland – although its ambassador to Beijing has pointed out that he cannot apply from outside the country. Asylum claims lodged in Hong Kong were for resettlement to a third country, said Nicholas Bequelin, senior Asia researcher for Human Rights Watch. While the UNHCR can still make decisions on cases, the March ruling means that those who are rejected have the right to have their case considered by Hong Kong officials. "The ultimate outcome will not be that he can spend his life in Hong Kong, but he has some sort of assurance of a legal process," Bequelin said. The NSA whistleblower said he came to Hong Kong because "they have a spirited commitment to free speech and the right of political dissent" and because he believed it was one of the few places that could and would resist the dictates of the US government. It is part of China but enjoys considerable autonomy under the "one country, two systems" framework. Getting in would have been easy, which may have been one of its attractions: it offers a 90-day visa-free stay to United States citizens. But Hong Kong has an extradition treaty with the US, negotiated just before the 1997 handover, and a long history of co-operating with the US on criminal matters. The treaty includes a provision allowing the mainland to veto a request if it affects Beijing's "defence, foreign affairs, or essential public interest or policy", but it appears to apply only to Chinese nationals and experts say they are not aware of it being used. China-watchers also wonder if Beijing would wish to become publicly involved in such a high profile case – particularly given China's doctrine of non-interference in other countries' domestic affairs, and that it comes days after the meeting between presidents Xi Jinping and Barack Obama, as the countries seek to improve bilateral relations. "Within the recent context of the California summit, I would think China is not about to protect him if the Americans really want him," said David Zweig of the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. "The extradition treaty also gives either side the right to refuse a request in the case of political offences." In general, Hong Kong's immigration decisions are independent of the mainland, but it has barred entry to individuals such as Wang Dan and Wu'erkaixi, former leaders of the student protests in Tiananmen Square in 1989. Young said in reality most cases were taken without mainland interference. "But in cases where something touches on the heart of Chinese interests I think perhaps we have to wonder whether there might be interference or at least influence." A press officer for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Beijing, where Monday is a public holiday, requested that questions be faxed to the department. There was no immediate response.