Forgive me for praising The Guardian, but I cannot ignore the genuine world exclusive it has been publishing over the last couple of days about the scale of surveillance by the US secret service. And I also want to praise the bravery of the whistleblower, Edward Snowden, who has risked liberty - possibly his life - to leak the details of the intelligence gathering. His action was in the finest traditions of whistleblowing. He acted for the public good rather than private gain. He is quoted in today's Guardian as saying: "I can't in good conscience allow the US government to destroy privacy, internet freedom and basic liberties for people around the world with this massive surveillance machine they're secretly building." The Guardian's leading article has it right in observing that "Snowden is self-evidently not a common thief. He is more like a conscientious objector." The breaking of the Snowden revelations story must surely put The Guardian in line for a Pulitzer, making it the first British newspaper to win the award. As I said during an interview with the Associated Press, The Guardian has done something that traditional mainstream outlets in the States failed to do and has therefore beaten the might of American journalism in its own backyard. Indeed, some Americans have been so surprised by The Guardian's scoop that they have wrongly attributed it to the Washington Post. Several comments on the newspaper's threads below the early stories made the error, as did a number of subsequent tweets. It's true that the Post has been carrying the material, but the originator of the story was most definitely The Guardian. The leaks about the National Security Agency's surveillance are the most serious in that agency's history, as Guardian editor Alan Rusbridger told staff in an internal memo. He was paying tribute to the "fantastic" global teamwork involved in reporting and producing the articles, pointing out that it has been placed The Guardian "even more firmly on the US and international journalistic map." It surely has, as the widespread coverage across the world has shown. As for the online traffic, that has been off the board. A serious story with serious implications has topped the chart.