Despite its many healthy attributes there has always been a paranoid streak in American public life, of which the authoritarian reaction to this past week's Guardian revelations about wholesale data mining – and leaker Edward Snowden's motives - is only the latest manifestation. Perhaps it is a deep legacy of those native Indian warriors tiptoeing unseen through the 17th-century forest, but there is always an enemy out there plotting to destroy America's earthly Eden, Walmart included. Fifty years ago, a distinguished US historian, Richard J Hofstadter, delivered a lecture, later a book entitled The Paranoid Style of American Politics. I've mislaid my copy (did they steal it?) but here's a summary. . It suggested that exaggeration, conspiratorial fantasy and an angry Manichean perspective – the world divided between the forces of absolute good and evil – is a recurring feature of domestic politics, one not confined to the rightwing crazies like radio shock jock Alex Jones either. Check out Jones, the shameless old huckster whom Andrew Neil tried to interview on BBC Sunday Politics on Sunday here. The culture wars which rage in the US on issues such as abortion are nowadays much more fundamentalist on both sides than in Europe. In his own soft-spoken way Noam Chomsky is also strange. Leftwing populists of the 1890s ("crucified on a cross of gold") were paranoid about capitalism – just as many are today. Edward Snowden, whistleblower. Photograph: The Guardian Delivered at Oxford the day before John F Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas in 1963 and published at the time when the rightwing Arizona senator Barry Goldwater was poised to win the Republican nomination for president (he lost to Lyndon B Johnson in 1964) Hofstadter's thesis argued that the need for working compromise in a realistic world is at odds with the paranoid, Manichean view that requires absolute victory over evil – unrealistic in its scope and ambition, as has regularly been shown in our own lifetimes. Thus the cold war to contain Soviet expansionism (the even more paranoid Russians felt the same way about us) was apparently won in 1989 when the Berlin Wall fell and the old Tsarist empire crumbled. But lo, the KGB is back in business in a new guise, heirs to the Cheka and its predecessors. Osama bin Laden is dead (not even Alex Jones denies that), but the security state erected after 9/11 to wage the ill-named "war on terror" gathers momentum. So Bin Laden would be chuckling in his grave today if he had a sense of humour or indeed a grave. Like a street brawler who starts a fight or a demagogue who burns down a mosque to create fear and repression, Ossie is getting what he wanted – or will do if all don't push back and restrain the self-aggrandising features of the security state. Barack Obama: embracing the security state. Photograph: Evan Vucci/AP It's not that its agents plan to be wicked – most of them, anyway – it's just that unaccountable opportunity and a sense of righteousness leads them astray. That's what Snowden decided he was seeing – not occasionally, but every day – in his work as a very well paid data miner in Hawaii. To my mind, his Guardian interview was reassuringly measured and mature, a normal person reluctantly doing his public duty, in ways that – how shall we put this tactfully? - are not always the case, Julian. If the excessive overreaction to the Boston marathon bombing - the enforced lockdown of a major US city to catch a pathetic pair of lone wolves – did not underline that anxiety, the activities of Prism and the reaction to the Guardian's disclosures of its scale and reach certainly do. We need not be too smug here either: the British media eagerly led what was clearly a gross overreaction to the brutal but ultimately pathetic murder of Drummer Lee Rigby in Woolwich. It took a woman, Ingrid Loyau-Kennett, to confront the suspect with a simple, reassuring truth: we are many, you are few. At times of great change, economic threats or external danger, all societies risk running for safety behind an authoritarian leader with simplistic solutions – as Turkey currently demonstrates. Western Europe, twice rescued from its own horrors by American men and arms in the 20th century, has no grounds for complacency. But the US has less grounds for the paranoia it has repeatedly shown in its history as an independent state. Surrounded by two great oceans, bordered by only two states – Canada and Mexico, both more or less friendly – it should feel more secure than China with 20 neighbours, few very friendly at all, or Russia, victim of a surprise attack (like the US) in 1941, but vulnerable to invasion across flat, hard-to-defend borders for centuries. Yet the US government's sweeping Palmer Raids (young J Edgar Hoover was one agent involved) and deportations against the "red scare" of 1919-20, an echo of the anti-foreigner "Know Nothing" populism of the mid-19th century, saw no comparable strategy in Britain, though respectable society was equally terrified of a Bolshevik revolution from below. Hoover's long reign at the FBI (1935-72) has no comparison either, let alone the fear he struck in the hearts of what William Hague complacently calls those law-abiding citizens who have nothing to fear. It was of Hoover that LBJ said he would not sack him because it is "better to have him inside the tent pissing out than outside pissing in." Hoover was also beset by rumours about his sexuality, a reminder of another of Hofstadter's points: a feature of the paranoid state is the projection on others of unacceptable aspects of oneself. Where that leaves Barack Obama, I do not know. Too high levels of expectations were invested in the president in 2008, but he has proved a disappointment in many ways on a more modest scale – not least in his embrace of the Bush era security state he once denounced. As Snowden told Glenn Greenwald and Ewen MacAskill, it is not what he or we expected. The president does not sound convincing – or even convinced – by what he has been saying. And Guantánamo Bay remains in business. Almost as bad, I recently read Dave Eggers' book, Zeitoun, the true story of a respectable Syrian-American and his friends wrongly arrested on suspicion of looting in post-Katrina and held Guantánamo-style in the United States itself for weeks – no phone call, no lawyer, yellow jumpsuits. No wonder Snowden fears for his safety. Yet I remain an optimist about the capacity of the United States to draw back from its own excesses and paranoid fears. The Eisenhower administration was not heroic when confronted with the poisonous cold war demagoguery of Senator Joe McCarthy in the paranoid, highly conformist 1950s. But the US Senate's Army-McCarthy hearings (wonderfully told in volume three of Robert Caro's great biography of LBJ) gradually exposed him for the fraud he was. The sorcerer's apprentice, Richard Nixon, became president, but his own paranoia was exposed and he was driven from office. There was a reaction to excess. It happened because all sorts of Americans - including media grandees like Walters Lippman and Cronkite, CBS's Ed Murrow as well as gadflies like IF "Izzy" Stone as well as politicians and lawyers – stood up for the constitution, as many have done in this long, difficult decade since 9/11. Even Eisenhower, the mastermind of D-Day, eventually spoke out against the threat from the "military-industrial complex", Even more than Goldwater, Ike would be dismissed as a pinko by the paranoids today. So Edward Snowden, the techie from Hawaii, is the latest in a long line of patriots resisting the siren demands of the Patriot Act and of paranoid activity. There are always trade-offs between security and liberty, but fewer than the securicrats would have us believe and fewer still that require absolute secrecy. Up the republic.