11.01am BST You can read all today's Guardian politics stories here. And all the politics stories published yesterday, including some in today's paper, are here. As for the rest of the papers, here's the PoliticsHome list of top 10 must-reads, here's the ConservativeHome round-up of today's political stories, and here's the New Statesman list of top 10 comment articles. As for the rest of the paper, here are some articles and stories I found particularly interesting. • Boris Johnson in the Daily Telegraph says people should not expect their internet information to remain private. My only question is: what on earth did you expect? I have never trusted the security of the internet, or emails, or indeed texts – because it was obvious from the very dawn of what was once called the information superhighway that any data you sent to some server or database or gizmo could no longer be in any sense private. It was no longer shared between you and one recipient. It was stored in the memory of some vast global intermediary. It was out there, in the ether, just waiting to be hacked or lost or stolen or accidentally blurted to your enemies. That is why I have always rather assumed that any email I send should be drafted as if for public consumption, and that all kinds of people could be reading it – should they wish so to fritter their lives – as soon as I pressed “send” ... I have two suggestions for those libertarians who have been scandalised by the revelations from America. The first is to look at the bestseller lists, and the amazing success of a sweet little book called Letters to Lupin – the gin-sodden epistles of Home Counties racing buff Roger Mortimer to his wayward son. People adore this book because it evokes those men who fought in the war – Dear Bill characters whose conversation involved dirty jokes, the state of the lawn, the soundness of horses, what the dog had done on the carpet and the general insanity of their wives and other female relatives. They remind us of a generation now fading, capable of stiff upper lip but also of expressing great love and devotion; and they remind us of how that love was expressed. The letter was an event in itself. It wasn’t just a piece of information pinged into your inbox. It was a lovely hodge-podge of gossip and news and jokes, an art-form that needs to be revived, and so all those who want to beat the internet snoops – just get out the old Basildon Bond, suck the end of your biro, assemble your thoughts carefully and do as our grandparents did. • Andrew Haldenby at the Daily Telegraph says Ed Balls deserves credit for being willing to contemplate cutting pensions. Yesterday, Mr Balls repeated the trick by saying that any future government will have to limit spending on pensions as well as other areas of public spending. He is the first major politician to say so – and he deserves credit for real political courage, given that over a quarter of voters will be aged over 65 at the next election ... In fact, Mr Balls has identified a weak point in the Coalition’s platform. Up till now, ministers have done all they can to promise pensioners more money. As a result, they made the great mistake of promising to increase the basic state pension at the maximum possible rate. The so-called “triple lock” will see the state pension rise in line with whichever is highest out of prices, earnings or a base rate of 2.5 per cent. This is a reckless commitment for an era of ageing populations. Conservatives should reflect that one of Margaret Thatcher’s first acts at prime minister was to abolish the “triple lock” of her day, so that pensions would increase in line with prices alone. Mr Balls may claim to support the triple lock himself, but the logic of his position is that it would go if the public finances could not support it. So if Mr Osborne’s next review of public spending, due on June 26, does not explain how he will make pensions more affordable in future, Mr Balls could have a claim to have a more credible position on public spending. That would be truly remarkable, given that he was one of the architects of the spending boom that presaged so many of our current problems. • Owen Jones in the Independent says the People’s Assembly is providing the Labour party with real competition on the left. As we know, nature abhors a vacuum. It is not that champions of progressive politics do not already exist: it’s just they are hopelessly fragmented. There are the likes of UK Uncut, who have driven the injustice of tax avoidance on to the agenda. Occupy reminded us who caused the crisis, and who is being made to pay for it. Trade unions have mobilised hundreds of thousands of workers in strikes and demonstrations. The Greens – not least through their redoubtable MP Caroline Lucas – have linked the environmental crisis to the economic crisis. Progressive Labour activists and MPs have stood firm, demanding their leadership offers a genuine alternative. Disabled activists – on the streets, on social media – have roared back at cuts hammering the most vulnerable people in society. None of this will be replaced by the People’s Assembly: it will just help bring them together with local groups in every town and city. Some will want a movement that puts pressure on Labour to do the job it was founded to do, fighting for working people; others think that’s about as productive as mating with a toaster. That doesn’t matter: it’s a broad movement, not a party, and there is a shared determination to give a platform to those hit by the Government’s austerity offensive, and to push an alternative that gives people hope. “We can’t afford to cock this up this time round,” as a young man put it to me in Nottingham. • Sam Coates in the Times (paywall) says Britain has given a £10bn back-door bank bail-out to the Republic of Ireland. Britain has given a back-door bailout worth around £10 billion to the Republic of Ireland in an arrangement that was never explicitly approved by Parliament, it can be revealed. The money has been pumped into Ulster Bank, a subsidiary of the state-owned Royal Bank of Scotland which was rescued by a public cash injection of £45 billion five years ago. New figures show that Ulster Bank, which operates predominantly in the Republic despite its name, has accounted for approximately one in every four pounds of losses at RBS since 2008. • Roland Watson and Billy Kember in the Times (paywall) says the Tory whips are being blamed for leaking the news that Andrew Bridgen MP has written a letter demanding a no confidence vote on David Cameron’s leadership. Mr Bridgen’s name was disclosed to a Sunday newspaper in an apparent attempt to make an example of him. The only people who knew that the MP for North West Leicestershire had written to Graham Brady, the chairman of the 1922 Committee, demanding a vote aimed at dislodging the Prime Minister were Mr Brady himself and the Tory Whips’ Office. Mr Bridgen had told them as a courtesy. Mr Brady, as chairman of the committee of backbench MPs and guardian of the process for triggering a possible leadership election, does not reveal how many letters he has received calling for a vote of no confidence. If and when he received 46 such letters from MPs, he would announce that the threshold for a no confidence motion had been passed. One well-placed MP said: “Graham would never tell anyone. This smacks of the whips looking for revenge by dealing with a sensitive piece of information that someone has voluntarily trusted with them. It’s disgraceful.” • Mure Dickie in the Financial Times (subscription) says the Tories are a fringe party in Scotland. Such is the decline of the once-mighty Conservative party in Scotland that it only laid out 240 seats for members attending its annual conference – and still struggled to fill them. Conservatives lead the UK coalition government in London, but in Scotland they are condemned to the fringe. A party that in the 1950s was backed by more than half of Scotland’s voters now accounts for just one of the 59 Scottish members of parliament in Westminster.