Want to work for the sprawling US intelligence apparatus? It might make more sense to send your resumé not to a spy agency, but to one of the hundreds of for-profit contractors that provide the spies with everything from IT support to logistics to security. You will almost certainly make more money that way. The case of Edward Snowden, the whistleblower for the Guardian and the Washington Post who exposed massive domestic surveillance, has opened a window into how a 29-year old IT specialist can access some of the most sensitive secrets in US intelligence. It also shows that as the national security apparatus expands, it entrusts an ever broader number of people with secrets that they may feel compelled to leak. “There’s been a tremendous surge in contractor reliance, post-9/11,” said Steve Aftergood, an intelligence watcher at the Federation of American Scientists. “Contractors are asked to perform tasks from intelligence analysis to prisoner interrogation to you name it.” There are structural reasons for the reliance on contractors – which is a very lucrative business. But some of it is born of necessity: despite the Hollywood image of competent and tech-savvy spies, much of the hardware and software employed by the 16 US intelligence agencies is provided by private firms, which are often swifter at adapting to new technologies than the cumbersome US bureaucracy. That holds even for the hyper-technical NSA. “Contractors are essential to NSA's mission. They provide analysts and technicians. Contractors build custom technology for the agency's signals-gathering and analysis work,” said Shane Harris, the author of The Watchers: The Rise of America’s Surveillance State. “NSA, like a lot of intelligence agencies, prefers to build custom systems and not buy as much technology off the shelf. Some contractors are more important than others. SAIC, for instance, which used to have its headquarters in California, has historically been so entrenched in the agency's mission that employees jokingly called it NSA-West. And NSA technicians regularly go to work in the private sector, often on the same projects they worked on as government employees.” Neither the NSA nor the office of the director of national intelligence would respond to the Guardian’s inquiries about how many contractors work for the intelligence community by the time of publication. A Washington Post series on outsourced security functions found that the homeland security, counterterrorism and spy agencies do business with 1,931 companies in 10,000 locations across the United States. Snowden worked for Booz Allen Hamilton for the past three months, according to a Sunday statement from the firm, as well as for other contractors providing IT support and even security guard services to the NSA. Booz Allen reported $5.86bn in revenue in fiscal 2012, according to its most recent financial report, which boasts that 70% of its 25,000 employees hold a government security clearance, “of which 49% were top secret or higher”. The New York Times reported that $1.3bn of its revenue comes from intelligence contracts. Symbolizing the firm’s closeness with the spy agencies with which it does business, the former director of US national intelligence John “Mike” McConnell is now a Booz Allen vice-president. McConnell’s successor, retired general James Clapper, is a former company executive. It is not just Booz Allen. A constellation of private companies provide the intelligence community with everything from shipping to security. William J Black, an NSA veteran, retired from the agency in 1997, joined SAIC shortly thereafter – and then returned to NSA as deputy director in 2000. The only American ever convicted in connection with the CIA’s post-9/11 torture program was not a CIA employee but a contractor, David Passaro, who beat an Afghan detainee to death. The reliance on contract personnel has sometimes alarmed the intelligence agencies’ congressional overseers. A 2007 Senate report found that the spy community had bolstered its work forces by 20% since the September 11 attacks, a rapid change that depended on hiring contractors. While companies and agencies typically outsource functions to save money, the Senate intelligence committee found that contractors are more expensive than full-time government employees. “It has been estimated that the average annual cost of a United States Government civilian employee is $126,500,” the committee found, “while the average annual cost of a ‘fully loaded’ (including overhead) core contractor is $250,000.” In addition to the contractor support, there is another lucrative private interest deeply involved with the NSA and the FBI: the telecommunications firms themselves. Thomas Tamm saw that relationship up close when he worked for the Justice Department, preparing eavesdropping requests for the secretive Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court during the Bush administration. Eventually, Tamm would grow so disturbed by the scope of the spy efforts that he would leak information about it to the New York Times, an act that brought him into the crosshairs of his own department. “We were in bed with the huge telecoms,” Tamm said. “There was always pressure to renew [surveillance requests] after 90 days. I once asked what the big deal was if we went down one, two days on Fisa, we’re not listening in real time anyway. Well, the telecoms charge a lot of money to flip the switch, to turn it off and turn it back on.” But the reliance on contractors carries risks for the intelligence community. The more contractors it hires, the more contractors receive access to sensitive US security information – making it harder to keep that classified data out of the public eye. The strong temptation will be to compartmentalize more security information, to limit the ability of any one private user to access terabytes of sensitive data. But that’s hard to do with systems administrators and technical specialists. According to Shane Harris, “there are plenty of contractors across the intelligence community that have some deep objections to some of the work the government does”, even though few are willing to expose themselves to reprisal like Snowden. Steve Aftergood said he expected contractors and spy agencies to quickly take measures to limit individual employee access to classified information. But the way to stop future leaks, he said, might, paradoxically, be to remove some of the secrecy from the US surveillance apparatus. Aftergood said: “There’s a real possibility that if there had been greater transparency a year ago, Snowden might have ended up making different choices than he did.”