‘In the Commons William Hague denied GCHQ complicity, but government looms like a predator drone locking on to every private email.' Photograph: Pa Wire/PA The state is our enemy, a malevolent, prying Big Brother who can intrude on anyone, anywhere. The fallout from Edward Snowden's revelations to the Guardian about the extent of the state's invasion of privacy will be long-lasting. How much more shocking that this is allowed by a Democratic president who stood for hope and trust. No wonder the right eagerly expresses its shock, from Glenn Beck to Mitt Romney, with an I-told-you-so relish that stirs the anti-government paranoia of the militias, the Tea Party and all who saw a communist plot even in minimalist Obamacare. Everywhere the idea of the good state is under siege. Civil liberties advocates often find their arguments against an over-mighty state purloined by the right, chiming nicely with libertarian shrink-the-statists. In the Commons William Hague denied GCHQ complicity, but nonetheless government looms like a predator drone locking on to every private email. The triumph of anti-state neoliberalism has for decades cowed the case for government as a force for good. In nervous retreat, politicians of the liberal left have too willingly colluded with the prevailing state-inept, private-sector-better wind. The crash and the slump should have ignited a sense that government is often all that stands between us and disaster, but the foghorns of the right succeeded in blaming government more than runaway financiers. Basic economics still has the nerve to teach as fact that markets are more rational than public servants can ever be: economic success depends on rugged global entrepreneurialism where silverbacks of the market eat what they kill, obstructed only by pettyfogging state bureaucrats chaining them down with irksome employment regulations, corporate taxes, health and safety and God knows what. The pro-state case is uphill work when trolled into "Go and live in North Korea, then." The danger is the NSA revelations tip the balance. Published this week, The Entrepreneurial State, by Professor Mariana Mazzucato of Sussex University, offers a forensic analysis of how the state is prime investor and creator of most great innovations. Companies can thank the state not just for their security under the law, for educating their staff, or building roads for their trucks – but for the most productive great leaps forward too. Not only the internet but its technologies sprang from vast state investment (such as GPS and touch screens, biotech and nanotech), where the state took the risk but others took the profit; Apple and Google rode on the back of state research; US pharmaceuticals depend on $600bn of state-funded research, accounting for 75% of the drugs that companies profit from afterwards. Mazzucato debunks the myth that the state needs do nothing but stay away – and says the green revolution is the next great investment successful states are making – though not Britain's, stymied by the neoliberal ascendency that brands climate change a socialist plot. Those who see the state as an alien with tentacles grown beyond democratic control want to hack it down. The greater threat is a too weak state overwhelmed by global business. Defending the benevolent state as the best expression of the collective public endeavour gets harder when trust in the politicians who run it ebbs away. Fine speeches may be a hazard when, fairly or not, Obama disappoints for failing to govern with the majesty of his rhetoric. In Britain the MPs' expenses scandal was damaging enough, worse still if – despite frequent entrapment – senior parliamentarians are still "cabs for hire". Corruption looks endemic when ex-ministers reap rich rewards from companies contracting with their former departments. What use a lobbyists' register when lobbyists sit at the heart of government? Cameron's election strategist, Lynton Crosby, won't reveal his clients, yet his lobbying firm has represented alcohol and tobacco interests that have successfully kicked away laws on cigarette packaging, alcohol pricing and registering lobbyists. Murdoch had his own man at Cameron's side from day one, no revolving door but en suite. What is the public to think? With political trust rarer than hen's teeth, the mendacity of the Conservatives at the last election will make it near impossible to persuade anyone at the next one. The "most family-friendly" and "the greenest" government ever; "no NHS reorganisation"; no VAT rise; no cuts to education maintenance allowance or child trust fund; three more army battalions; 3,000 more police; rail fares to be pegged; a post office bank created and not sold off – none of it was intended to be true. Cameron said just days before the election: "Any cabinet minister who comes to me and says 'Here are my plans' and they involve frontline reductions, they'll be sent straight back to their department to go away and think again." None were sent back. "All in it together," said George Osborne as he cut benefits and gave top earners a 5% tax bonus. How can people trust political promises again? All this stirs anti-government hostility, as more voters refuse to vote, or opt for anyone disguised as an outsider. Are citizens to blame for demanding magic from their leaders – tip-top public services but low taxes, total security but no intrusion on privacy? "You can't have 100% security and also then have 100% privacy and zero inconvenience," said President Obama, defending US surveillance this week. An off-duty soldier is slaughtered, bombs go off at the Boston marathon and the first question asked is: why isn't anyone who ever expressed an extreme view under 24-hour watch? Trust comes from telling the truth and treating citizens as adults: it can't be done, and anyway the terror risk is low compared with road deaths or the two women murdered by partners each week. Labour's hard task is not just to instil trust in the party but to repair the idea of good government. Honesty, authenticity and conviction build trust, while overcaution seems shifty. Trust comes not just from popular policies, such as massive home-building, but sticking to unpopular ones. Refusing a referendum because Ed Miliband will not lead Britain out of Europe to its destruction may be more of a winner than it seems: Ukip is the democratic choice for exit, Labour for staying at the international table. However counterintuitive in this era, Labour needs to hymn the good the state does and the civilising value of what taxes buy – health, education, safety, proud public spaces. All the things that people value most.