Top eight stories on MediaGuardian BBC accused of misleading parliament on DMI MPs say evidence given by senior management in 2011 wasn't true as £98.4m cost of 'embarrassing' failure is revealed Internet firms try to salvage reputations Microsoft, Yahoo, Google, Facebook, PalTalk, AOL, Skype, YouTube and Apple have been floundering for a response to NSA revelations The Times to cut 20 editorial jobs John Witherow, the acting editor, tells staff that division of News Corp arms means papers can no longer be subsidised BBC 'error of judgment' over R4 interview Reporter on consumer show You and Yours spoke to students from a college represented by a PR firm run by his wife BBC Weather launches for iPhone and Android Free app now available in the UK, going head-to-head with Yahoo, Met Office and other independent apps The Returned watched by 1.5m on Channel 4 TV ratings: BBC1's coverage of Canadian Grand Prix pulls in 4.6 million, with David Suchet's final Poirot attracting 4.8 million Apple unveils iTunes Radio – and says it will be free to iPhone and iPad users Tech company trumpets new music service which will directly challenge Google, Spotify, Pandora and Last.fm Julian Assange praises Edward Snowden as a hero Whistleblower will go down in history for exposing 'formulation of a mass surveillance state', says WikiLeaks founder Top comment on MediaGuardian Murdoch's News Corp mulls FCPA deal with US Justice Department Michael Wolff: With News Corp set to split off its newspaper business, a settlement over bribery allegations in the UK may be imminent Today's headlines The Guardian Europe demands answers from Barack Obama over internet surveillance. P1 What William Hague said about British surveillance policy. P5 Home Office presses ahead with snoopers' charter. P5 Edward Snowden may be able to buy time in asylum system. P6, 7 Internet giants battle to salvage reputations. P6 What is your digital shadow? P7 Europe seeks answers on data collection. P7 US surveillance law poses grave risk to citizens' rights. P9 BBC misled MPs over £100m digital failure. P18 Greek editor's retrial put back to October. P20 Bill Gates charity buys £110m stake in G4S. P28 Did we escape the United Stasi of America? P30 Leader: civil liberties versus security needs. P32 Seven whistleblowers speak out. G2 P6, 7 Daily Telegraph US surveillance helped prevent Olympics terror. P2 From Hawaii to Hong Kong, the trail of a whistleblower. P16 Should we all be scared of internet data snooping? P19 Watchdog to attack rural broadband deal. Business P1. BT defends value for money in rural broadband. Business P3 Sky to raise TV fees despite price war. Business P4 Tech giants face battle to restore trust after Edward Snowden. Business P5 Apple dials out critics with iPhone upgrades. Business P5 Google outsmarts rivals with Waze map app deal. Business. P5 Financial Times Watchdog to hit out at broadband rollout. P3 Treasury eyes profits from potential Vodafone sale of Verizon stake. P3 William Hague denies spying allegations. P6 Focus shits to contractors on surveillance. P6 Letters on snooper state. P12 Apple steps up Google battle with iOS software upgrade. P17 Preview of News Corp break up. P20 The Times Dropout who blew the whistle on US surveillance. P4 Ex-BBC DG Mark Thomspon to be summoned before select committee. P4 Who's watching Big Brother watching us? P25 The Independent Whistleblower told to leave Hong Kong. P4 and P5 Apple launches iRadio. P7 i Apple ready to launch iTunes Radio in Britain. P10 Wall Street Journal Europe Source of US leaks disappears. P1 UK denies unlawful data harvesting. P4 Police question France Telecom's CEO. P4 Big Brother and Big Data. P16 Apple unveils iOS 7 for mobile. P19 Daily Mail BBC boss misled MPs over £100 IT fiasco. P6 Our online surveillance prevented Olympics terror. P12, 13 How our spooks get round the law. P12 Edward Snowden: The college dropout behind leaks. P13 MPs attack Met over plebgate.P21 Daily Express Ex-Corrie star cleared of sex attacks. P4 Simon Cowell's grip on the music is too tight. P5 The Sun Corrie star cleared of sex attacks on boys. P1 Ken Loach trial date set. P5 Daily Mirror Coronation Street's Lancel cleared. P5 Daily Star Big Brother Rylan is hate mob target. P1 The end of Coronation Street's Ken Loach? P7 Go to MediaGuardian