8.56am BST Clare Horton writes Good morning and welcome to the daily live blog from the Guardian Healthcare Professionals Network. Throughout the day, we'll be bringing you news, comment and analysis from around the web. The Guardian reports this morning that two-thirds of the 150,000 deaths a year among under-75s in England are potentially avoidable, with better health interventions and changes in lifestyles capable of cutting the toll by tens of thousands, according to the government's new public health body. Public Health England has published league tables for premature deaths in county council and unitary authority areas, and also ranked them by deaths from big killers including cancer, heart disease and strokes, and lung and liver disease. There's also news of study findings that breast cancer screening programmes have yet to show a reduction in the number of women who die from the disease. And hundreds of deaths at Stafford hospital are being examined by police after a review identified 200 to 300 cases where neglect might have been a contributory factor. The Press Association report says: Following the publication of the Francis report into serious care failings at Mid Staffordshire NHS foundation trust, police, medical regulators and prosecutors launched a multi-agency review to establish whether any criminal offences were committed. Elsewhere, the BBC also reports on the Public Health England league table, and says the health secretary, Jeremy Hunt, has described the local variation in early death rates as "shocking" and called for action to improve health. And the Telegraph reports that women will be encouraged to give birth naturally amid fears that mothers are opting for caesarean sections needlessly, leading to a significant rise in the number of operations. If there's a story, report or event you'd like to highlight – or you would like to share your thoughts on any of the healthcare issues in the news today – you can get in touch by leaving a comment below the line or tweeting us at @GdnHealthcare.