Top eight stories on MediaGuardian Greece's ERT defies shutdown attempt Live Workers resist Greek government's attempt to close the country's state broadcaster as part of its austerity cutbacks, as a political storm rages over the move How the Guardian got its NSA scoop The full story behind the scoop and why the whistleblower approached the Guardian Express Newspapers to create up to 40 digital roles Richard Desmond makes first move towards 'digital first' strategy, with staff moving from print to online operation. News Corp shareholders approve split Dissident investors voice concern over Rupert Murdoch's role as group divides into publishing and entertainment companies BBC newsreader Rory Morrison dies Continuity announcer and newsreader had been suffering from rare form of cancer Mark Thompson recalled to explain BBC DMI evidence Mark Thompson told public accounts committee in 2011 that parts of content management system were 'already working' BBC unions hold strike vote over pay offer Corporation could face walkout after negotiations over flat-rate £650 rise prove fruitless BBC criticised for EDL leader's Today interview BBC under fire from ex-MP and an al-Jazeera presenter over Tommy Robinson's appearance on flagship programme Top comment on MediaGuardian How to interview the EDL Sunder Katwala: Talking to extreme figures is not easy, but Tommy Robinson was not challenged on some key points during his Today interview Today's headlines The Guardian Ewen MacAskill reveals how the Guardian got its NSA scoop. P1 and P 6-7 BBC under fire over interview with EDL leader. P5 Europe warns the US to respect internet privacy. P6-7 Bradley Manning trial to be captured in comic book. P20 Greece closes state broadcaster as IMF cuts bite. P24 Google buys social mapping startup Waze. P25 The US snooping is as bad as china. P28 Mass surveillance is about power as much as privacy. P29 Former GCHQ chief on how to make snooping ethical and effective. P30 Daily Telegraph Eric Snowden coverage. P1,15,19 BBC accused of poisoning the airwaves with EDL interview. P2 Prince Charles and Camilla star in Beano with Bash Street Kids. P3 Call for Facebook boardroom shakeup. Business.P3 News Corp split paves way for BSkyB bid. Business P5 Financial Times Google and Facebook urge US to loosen gag on role in online spying. P1 Greece pulls plug on state broadcaster to comply with IMF scheme. P8 Nokia to stop shipping Symbian phones and go with Windows. P15 Google buys Waze for $1bn. P20 The Times Prince Charles and Camilla star in Beano with Bash Street Kids. P11 BBC accused as EDL leader uses interview to fuel fire. P12 Playstation 4 strikes first in console wars. P16 Royal charter will be imposed. P17 Greek BBC faces closure. P29 WPP loses a voice in the boardroom. P38 The Independent Washington rages at 'traitor' Eric Snowden. P35 Google buys 'Waz' app. P58 i Matthew Norman on Maria Miller's plans to commemorate first world war anniversary. P13 Review: John Oliver on The Daily Show. P17 Vladimir Putin: Russia Today aims to 'end the monopoly of Anglo-Saxon media'. P17 Google buys Waze navigation app. P42 Wall Street Journal Europe Greece shuts broadcaster to meet IMF savings demands. P3 Google asks for permission to publish US data snooping requests. P6 China gives no ground on cyber attacks in US. P16 Leader: Edward Snowden's 'conscience'. P16 Big Brother really is watching us. P17 Nintendo plans jolt for Wii U. P19 Daily Mail Leader: Price of BBC bias. P14 Will Apple's new look bear fruit? P21 Daily Express How Cat Deeley has become golden girl of Hollywood. P1 The Sun PS4 undercuts rival Xbox One. P26 Robert Lindsay 'pulled out of BBC's Line of Duty after two days on set'. TV Biz P1 Helen Mirron: Time for a woman to star in Doctor Who. TV Biz P1 Interview with Coronation Street's Debbie Rush. TV Biz P2-3 Smack the Pony trio plan comeback. TV Biz P1 P4 Daily Mirror Downton Abbey coverage. P3 Eric Snowden on the run after NSA leak. P9 Alison Phillips: Cracks appearing in Britain's Got Talent. P13 PS4 undercuts rival Xbox One. P22 Daily Star Big Brother coverage. P1,4-5,7 Coronation Street's Bill Roache faces civil actions. P1,9 Go to MediaGuardian