William Hague on The Andrew Marr Show: Calm down, everyone, calm down … Photograph: Jeff Overs/BBC Hague: I would like to take this opportunity to reassure the country that the British security services would never resort to illegal snooping. Everyone: Go on, then. Hague: Go on, what? Everyone: Reassure us. Hague: I just have. It's all absolutely tickety-boo with our security services. In fact, our spooks are so open these days that GCHQ has more than 100 million friends on Facebook. Edward Snowden: Does it have any in Hong Kong? GCHQ: Oh yes! We've just started a "Whistleblowers are toast" group over there. It's already got hundreds of Likes from the NSA. Would you like to join? Snowden: Another time ... Tim Yeo: Can you tell me if there is a Facebook group for "MPs who have had to report themselves to the Parliamentary Standards Committee"? GCHQ: Let me check ... ah yes, there's hundreds of you in it. Yeo: But I'm completely innocent ... GCHQ: That's what they all say ... Yeo: But it's absurd to imagine that I would have in any way coached someone who worked for a subsidiary of a company who paid me a hefty whack on what to say to a select committee. We just happened to be sitting next to each other on a train, that's all. Look, I really don't need this. I make far more from my work outside parliament than I do as an MP, so if you're going to go on making all these nasty insinuations ... Patrick Mercer: Don't get so worked up, Tim. Everyone will have forgotten about this in a week when the next calamity hits the coalition. Chill out and go to Fiji. I can probably get you some cheap "fact-finding" flights. Cameron: Exactamundo, Tim. These things do blow over. I'm just so pleased I'm not in the firing line this week. It was a close-run thing, though. I thought we were in for trouble when the Mail on Sunday led with "The Secret Affair" that could severely embarrass the government, but luckily that all went quiet. Osborne: I was wondering about that. Was it who I think it was ... Cameron: I'm afraid so. Osborne: So what are we going to do if it ever becomes public? Cameron: Be severely embarrassed.