4.55pm ET NSA director Keith Alexander's testimony before the Senate has moved behind closed doors. Here are the main points from what he said for public consumption: • Alexander says phone data collection under section 215 of the Patriot Act has "helped prevent" "dozens of terrorist events" "here and abroad." But then he couched that: "When I say dozens, what I'm talking about here is that these authorities [phone records + Prism] complement each other." • Alexander said Internet surveillance carried out under section 702 of Fisa Amendments Act was the key to stopping Najibullah Zazi's 2009 plot to bomb the New York City subway. Prism, as the program is known, apparently identified an email that Zazi sent to an address in Pakistan known to be associated with al-Qaeda. However, given the fact that the target email address was already known to be suspect, It is unclear why this email could not have been identified by surveillance obtained under a specific warrant. • Alexander contradicted Senate intelligence chair Dianne Feinstein's and House intelligence chair Mike Rogers' earlier assertion that the Zazi plot had been stopped by phone records collection and analysis. On Tuesday this blog covered Feinstein's seeming confusion on the issue. • Alexander confirmed that Edward Snowden "was a system administrator with access to key parts of the network." "We do need to go back and look at the processes – where we went wrong," he said. • Senator Jeff Merkley of Oregon asked Alexander how the NSA had made the transition to collecting "all phone records, all the time, all across America." Alexander said he'd answer in private. • Alexander seemed to suggest that if the NSA had the ability to map all phone calls in 2001, it could have caught on to the scope of the 9/11 plot before the attack, by starting with a phone number it had for one of the hijackers. "Because of business records Fisa, we could take that number and go backwards in time, and if we saw four other groups, we'd say this looks of interest and pass this to the FBI." Which, of course, did not happen. • Alexander denied that NSA workers in a role like Snowden's have a way to "tap into virtually any American's phone or emails." "False," he said. "I know of no way to do that." • Alexander said he is hoping for greater transparency in what the surveillance programs do but said some secrecy helps the mission. • Chairwoman Barbara Mikulski declared "It is a time now for a new, fresh, national debate," on privacy and security. Updated at 5.11pm ET