Top eight stories on MediaGuardian Rupert Murdoch files for divorce from wife Wendi Deng Murdoch News Corporation boss cites irretrievable breakdown in marriage in divorce filing from woman seen as key player in media empire ERT: BBC director calls on Greek government to reopen broadcaster Tony Hall joins directors general of 50 European TV and radio broadcasters in signing petition Thompson likely to be quizzed over DMI row Independent review likely to question former director general about whether he was aware of concerns over doomed digital project TV ratings to measure online catch-up viewing Barb 'TV player' report including BBC iPlayer, 4oD and ITV Player planned for release by end of 2013 Spare Rib relaunch stalls over use of name Charlotte Raven seeks suggestions for new name after original founders of magazine voice concerns over business plan Julia Gillard speaks of fears for women in public life after Sattler radio ambush PM raises concerns that interview in which she was asked about the sexuality of her partner might dissuade women from politics BBC criticised over Farage and Galloway Question Time appearance Politicians appear on show devoted to Scottish independence despite neither Ukip nor Respect holding seats there Former Operation Yewtree officer to appear on Big Brother Former officer is believed to have been a detective constable who left the Met police two weeks ago Top comment on MediaGuardian Rupert Murdoch and Wendi Deng Murdoch: irretrievable breakdown Michael Wolff: The marriage had its tensions, but news of the ultimate power couple's divorce is 'jaw-dropping' – before we even know why Today's headlines The Guardian From serenade to separation: Rupert Murdoch splits from wife who slapped pie-thrower. P1, 3 Spare Rib to relaunch under different name after spat with founders. P4 BBC accused of unfairness over Question Time programme on Scottish independence. P6 Jimmy Savile detective to appear on Big Brother. P19 PRISM: Spying programme can prevent another Boston, says FBI chief. P28 PRISM: Edward Snowden case puts strain on China-US relations. P28 Radio host sacked for asking Australian PM if her partner is gay. P30 Greek state TV back on air in defiance of government. P30 Daily Telegraph Rupert Murdoch files for divorce. P1 and P5 Spare Rib launch prompts legal threat. P3 BBC must not treat licence fee like cash machine, says Lord Patten. P8 Apple looked at Amazon pact on ebooks and music. Business P4 Google on the defensive over its tax record. Business P5 News Corp offers redundancies to US journalists. Business P5 Financial Times PRISM: Intelligence chief under scrutiny. P6 Comment: PRISM: China's silence is golden on Washington snooping. P6 Editorial: China's cyber game – NSA furore must not eclipse threat of Chinese espionage. P10 Editorial: Athens' switch off – Government's decision to shut ERT is a necessary evil. P10 Personal technology. P12 Nintendo share value. P14 Google facing Brussels probe over 'below cost' Android licensing. P15 USA Today publisher turns to TV. P18 STM thrives as Wii idea goes past gaming. P21 The Times Bring back snoopers' charter say grandees. P1 Hacked Off lobbyist had undisclosed lobby pass. P7 National newspapers could be forced to subsidise local papers under Harman proposal. P7 Jimmy Savile officer joins Big Brother TV show. P8 Rupert Murdoch files for divorce. P13 Price of ebooks no problem for Apple. P43 Facebook cool on data grab as Arctic site opens. P43 The Independent Murdochs to divorce P1, 7 Spare Rib skewered after founders threaten legal action. P3 Inside the NSA. P38, 39 i Comment: Spare Rib row – Whatever happened to the idea of sisterhood? P14 Underdog factor works for comedian on Daily Show. P17 PRISM: Inside the NSA, America's most powerful secretive spy agency. P31 Digital Rights sold to Modern Times. P48 Samsung invades Nokia backyard. P48 Microsoft plans direct sales. P48 Wall Street Journal Europe Greek stations strike over state TV closure. P5 News Corp's Murdoch files for divorce. P20 Daily Mail Rupert Murdoch, 82, to divorce third wife. P9 Rebekah Brooks raises £17,000 for charity. P19 Cash machine culture at BBC. P21 Daily Express Jimmy Savile probe detective to enter Big Brother house. P5 Rupert Murdoch splits from his third wife, Wendi. P8 The Sun Cilla Black is bringing Blind Date back to ITV. TV Biz P1 Daily Mirror Big Brother coverage. P3 Hit 60s kids' book makes TV debut. P3 Voice judge Will 'sick' of Cleo's rants. P13 Fit Sir David Attenborough is off to Oz. P15 Daily Star Why I quit Jimmy Savile probe for Big Brother. P1, 4, 5 Big Brother coverage. P1, 4, 5, 6, 7 Rupert Murdoch to divorce third wife. P15 Go to MediaGuardian