Tech companies are not the first to get entangled in complex and controversial government relations. Photograph: Chris Jackson/Getty Images Google, Facebook, Verizon, and other companies are fielding inquiries about their role in US intelligence gathering. If a National Security Agency programme "violates Americans' constitutional rights of free speech, association, and privacy" (as the American Civil Liberties Union asserts in a lawsuit filed on Tuesday), how should we think about the roles and responsibilities of the companies involved? There is a lot we still don't know about NSA's activities, and our collective analysis of privacy versus security is clearly in flux. But the debate over the responsibilities of companies – particularly where government actions seem to contradict human rights standards – isn't new. In Saudi Arabia, discrimination against women is enshrined in national law, presenting a dilemma for global corporations whose policies promote equal opportunity for all. A number of countries allow only one trade union, obstructing freedom of association. Some of the same companies caught up in the spying headlines came under fire a few years ago for complying with censorship and surveillance requests in various countries. Granted, those examples are all from authoritarian regimes. The US Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA) was passed by democratically-elected lawmakers, with the aim of ensuring national security. But there are still useful parallels. We can't expect companies to defy the law. Employees disobeying government demands can be at risk of civil or criminal penalties, detention, or worse. A company doesn't know whether a government request is for the purposes of jailing a political dissident or for tracking down a bomb about to explode. We don't want companies deciding that compliance is optional. At the same time, companies across industries have learned that legal compliance is no defence in the court of public opinion. Shell had all of the required permits to dismantle the Brent Spar oil tanker and platform in the North Sea – but still saw Greenpeace scale its walls and customers boycott its petrol stations. Yahoo executives were lambasted as "moral pygmies" by a US congressman after complying with Chinese government requests for user data. Companies get stuck in the gaps between government requirements and social expectations. The United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights suggest that companies "comply with all applicable laws and respect internationally recognised human rights, wherever they operate" – and "seek ways to honour the principles of internationally recognised human rights when faced with conflicting requirements." For example, to get around union bans, companies have set up workers' committees and other grievance mechanisms. A number of companies have established training programmes for women where access to education and skills development is denied by the state. In addition to their individual actions, some companies have worked with human rights experts to help them negotiate an acceptable way forward. Some of these collaborations are bilateral while others have resulted in industry-wide guidance: the Voluntary Principles on Security & Human Rights for energy and mining companies, for example. Even more relevant to the current debate is the Global Network Initiative (GNI), which Microsoft, Google, and Yahoo developed with Human Rights Watch, the Center for Democracy and Technology, and other experts (including me). Signatories pledge, for example, to "interpret government restrictions and demands so as to minimise the negative effect on freedom of expression." The GNI language has been echoed in some of the company statements of the past week. The tech companies are doing what they can given their constraints: educating the public, advocating for greater transparency by governments, and collaborating with each other and outside experts. All of those activities are valuable, but also demonstrate the limits of what business can do. Despite concerns about growing corporate power in the world, states still enact laws which companies and citizens are compelled to obey. The tech companies are not the first to get entangled in complex and controversial government relationships – and they certainly won't be the last. Christine Bader is a human rights adviser to BSR and a Truman National Security Fellow. This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. Become a GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox