A slide from the NSA Prism presentation that gives more details of the secretive program exposed by investigative journalists at the Guardian. Photograph: Guardian The extent of the US National Security Agency's (NSA) surveillance using a computer programme called Prism to access the contents of emails and live chat held by the world's major internet companies including Google, Facebook and Skype is one of the most significant leaks in US political history. The story was first disclosed last week by investigative journalists at the Guardian – and now the whistleblower, IT specialist Edward Snowden has fled to Hong Kong in fear of reprisal from the US authorities. Here we pull together the best news stories, multimedia, teaching resources and websites to help you make sense of the story in class and look at the wider issues of privacy and surveillance and in the English, politics and citizenship classroom as well as the debate club with your students. From the Guardian National Security Agency (NSA) Prism program taps into user data of Apple, Google and others This story, published on Friday 7 June when Edward Snowden was still an anonymous source, reveals how the top secret Prism program claims direct access to servers of firms including Google, Apple and Facebook and how the companies deny any knowledge of the program which has been in operation since 2007. The article drew nearly 3,000 comments from readers. Edward Snowden hailed as hero, accused of treason as it happened – live blog On Sunday 9 June the Guardian revealed the source behind its series of stories on the NSA was Edward Snowden, 29. This fascinating live blog starts at 6.22am on Monday morning and lasts all day. Is Snowden a hero or a traitor? Read the opposing views and expert's comments in this fascinating blog. How the spy story of the age leaked out The full story behind the scoop and why the whistleblower approached the Guardian. NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden explains why he spoke out – video IT specialist Edward Snowden on why he decided to speak out: "I don't want to live in a society that does these sorts of thing". Why Prism should be stopped immediately – opinion Have our privacy rights been eroded in favour of government control? Kim Dotcom argues yes in this comment is free article. Data snooping - law abiding citizens have 'nothing to fear' says foreign secretary William Hague – video The foreign secretary, William Hague, says reports that Government Communications (GCHQ) are gathering intelligence from phones and online sites should not concern people who have nothing to hide. Oops, I shouldn't have sent that – interactive Find out under which circumstances your data could be uncovered, and which steps the government would have to take to retrieve it. A Guardian guide to your metadata – interactive What is all this metadata that's generated as you use technology? Here's a revealing guide to the data collected through the activities you do every day on your computer and mobile devices. #NSAfiles Q&A: how to protect yourself online Guardian's data editor James Ball answer's questions about the NSA data collection program - fascinating and useful stuff. On the Guardian Teacher Network Debate rages on internet 'snooping' revelation This article from schools news service The Day provides a very clear explanation of the IT worker who exposed mass US surveillance of emails and phone calls otherwise known as Prism. The article includes a Q&A plus activities for schools. Online privacy topic guide A great intro to the subject of online privacy from Debating Matters – should we really expect our activities on the internet to remain private? Everything pupils need to know for a heated debate plus extensive further reading. The Projectionist – lesson plans on privacy and surveillance This is a really fantastic set of cross curricular lesson ideas from the Theatre of Debate, based on Laura FitzGerald's play which explores the themes of privacy and surveillance including social networking sites and CCTV. Lots of food for thought here and you can also find an accompanying podcast. Codes with Anne Lister Those worried about privacy may like to follow in the footsteps of lesbian writer Anne Lister who wrote her diaries in code, as this PowerPoint from equality campaigning group Schools Out explains. Find all parts of the code lesson here including how to make a code wheel and invisible ink. The best of the web Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ) The website of the government agency tasked with keeping UK society safe and successful in the internet age – by providing info and intelligence and specialising in cyber security. GCHQ is one of three UK intelligence agencies – the other two being the MI5 and MI6. National Security Agency (NSA) What do the NSA have to say about the disclosure of classified information from Edward Snowden? Unsurprisingly it isn't too happy but doesn't make such a big meal of revelations on its official website. Liberty – on the Snooper's Charter Civil liberty and human rights champions Liberty set out their campaign to stop government's communications data bill (which Liberty dub the 'Snooper's Charter'), the proposed plans to store our online data. Explore the issues here – great fuel for debate clubs. Big Brother Watch The group set up to defend civil liberties and protect privacy has lots to say on the subject of Prism, the NSA and internet privacy – and the questions that it poses for the UK. The Register's take on Prism The British technology news and opinion website gives its take on Prism and the advice is to keep calm and carry on - Prism is not such a big deal... however Skype is no longer safe and we should keep an eye on the much more complex surveillance system the Home Office wants to install. What is prism? Useful Q&A from the Independent explaining what prism is, what it does, is it legal and what data it can obtain. This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. Looking for your next role? Take a look at Guardian jobs for schools for thousands of the latest teaching, leadership and support jobs.