April fool? … an RTS date with Adam Crozier in April appears in the June issue of Television. Photograph: Micha Theiner/City AM / Rex Features/Reuters ✒Many at the BBC were pleased by last week's appointment of former Channel 4 News editor Jim Gray as head of TV current affairs. But some were puzzled by the press release, which said "Jim will work closely with Clive Edwards [previously 'executive editor and commissioning editor of TV current affairs'] who it was announced last month will become commissioner for UK current affairs with enhanced responsibilities, leading on the current affairs strategy with the channel controllers." Happily, this suggests those who feared Tony Hall's new broom might sweep away the overlapping managers, bureaucratic Beeb-speak and jobs that look suspiciously like non-jobs – were far too pessimistic. Why is Edwards described as having "enhanced responsibilities", staff insolently ask, when he will no longer be overseeing production of all the major daily and weekly current affairs programmes, including Panorama and Newsnight? And why will the BBC not tell Monkey who he reports to? The Lord Hall giveth and he taketh away. ✒ As it seems restricted to members capable of time-travel (Michael Grade?), box office bookings are likely to be poor for a Royal Television Society evening with ITV boss Adam Crozier, which is promoted with its supposed date – 27 April – in ill-advised giant script in a full-page ad on page 2 of the, er, June issue of Television magazine. "Bloody Television!", you can imagine puce-faced RTS grandees roaring after having the cock-up pointed out, followed by the instant realisation that – as it's the society's own journal – they might just as well yell "Bloody us!" ✒Perilous times for Channel 5's Ben Frow, following Brian Cox's Twitter threat that "if I ever have the misfortune to meet the fish head who commissioned this shit on C5 about the moon landings, I WILL punch them" – as Frow is director of programmes, recently repeating Did We Land On The Moon?, the conspiracy theory-airing documentary that caused the physicist's toys to hit the carpet, was down to him. He resembles a younger John Malkovich, Prof Cox, and has been known to wear a skirt. ✒At least Frow must be on good terms with C5 owner Richard Desmond, as the policy of picking up hit ideas that Channel 4 now finds a little distasteful (and contaminated by association with its ancien regime) is progressing nicely. After the snapping up of Big Brother, next week sees C5 debuting its take on the Big Fat Gypsy … phenomenon, and it's very happy – as C4, stung by criticism, no longer is – to depict the community unflatteringly. A "Travellers season", no less, kicks off even-handedly with Traveller Feuds, about "riots, shootings, stabbings and bombings involving Travellers". Helpfully too, of course, it chimes with one of Desmond's papers' obsessions. ✒ At the Telegraph, after the recent in-house tension that Monkey highlighted over a writer's hatchet job on Kate Winslet, women's editor Emma Barnett looks to be out on a limb over another issue. Last week's final glimpse of BBC2's suffragette sitcom Up the Women was heralded by a page-topping Barnett puff enthusing that it was "proof that feminism can be fun". This seemed not a view widely shared at the Torygraph, which didn't review that episode or the two before it (presumably on the well-bred basis that you must say nothing if you can't say anything nice), managing only one tiny, largely critical preview. And as for her likely view of the blond-loving broadsheet publishing more scantily-clad photos - eight, including the front page – of Edward Snowden's pole-dancing girlfriend than any other paper... ✒ Places are still available on a day-long course on writing for newspapers and magazines organised for its readers by the Oldie (priced at a very decent £175, given that tea, biscuits and lunch are included), hosted by urbane veterans Jeremy Lewis and Richard Ingrams. But the eye-popping element is a 90-minute workshop on reporting from John Sweeney, which promises to transform the lives of the lucky group of over-60s. Watch out for YouTube clips (and even, perhaps, Panoramas) in a few years' time of bands of doddery born-again hacks in trenchcoats who use Saga hols as cover for smuggling their way into countries with oppressive regimes – and when there shout at politicians, officials, cops and bigots at a volume only possible thanks to their training by the controversial, foghorn-voiced TV investigator. ✒ Monkey's quote of the week comes from top tech innovator Marc Andreessen, raving about a future when if you're without Google glasses, you'll be "cut off from the world": "I think people are going to feel, basically, naked and lonely, when they don't have this," he told CNBC. ✒ Runner-up: an endearingly tentative sign-off on Channel 4 News, anchored (with Jon Snow in Iran) by the taboo-busting distaff double-act of Cathy Newman and Jackie Long: "Long: That's it from us. Two women on the programme and it's still on air. Who'd have thought it, eh? Newman. Making history. Sort of. We think. Maybe. We've got to check that one out, anyway. Back tomorrow night."