A banner in Hong Kong supporting NSA operative Edward Snowden. Photograph: Philippe Lopez/AFP/Getty Images NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden has dismissed speculation that he might provide classified US information to other governments as a smear and distraction, saying he could be "petting a phoenix in Beijing by now" if he were a Chinese spy. The former US vice-president Dick Cheney and others had voiced suspicion about his decision to fly to Hong Kong, where he accused the US government of hacking targets there and on the Chinese mainland. In a live chat with Guardian readers Snowden wrote: "This is a predictable smear that I anticipated before going public, as the US media has a kneejerk RED CHINA!' reaction to anything involving HK or the PRC, and is intended to distract from the issue of US government misconduct. "Ask yourself: if I were a Chinese spy, why wouldn't I have flown directly into Beijing? I could be living in a palace petting a phoenix by now." Pressed again to state clearly whether he had given any information to Beijing, he said: "No. I have had no contact with the Chinese government … I only work with journalists." Earlier, China's foreign ministry said suggestions he might have acted for Beijing were completely groundless. Spokeswoman Hua Chunying, speaking at a regular press briefing on Monday, also urged the US to "pay attention to the international community's concerns and demands and give … the necessary explanation" of its surveillance activities. Her remarks were in response to questions from two state media organisations. She had previously declined to comment on the 29-year-old's case, or his claims that the US had hacked targets in Hong Kong and on the Chinese mainland. On Sunday, Cheney told Fox News that Snowden was a traitor and questioned his decision to travel to Hong Kong. "I'm suspicious because he went to China. That's not a place where you would ordinarily want to go if you are interested in freedom, liberty and so forth," he said, adding: "It raises questions whether or not he had that kind of connection before he did this." Cheney suggested that Snowden could still have confidential data and that the Chinese would "probably be willing to provide immunity for him or sanctuary for him in exchange for what he presumably knows or doesn't know". Others have suggested that if anything, Beijing could lean on the Hong Kong government to return him to the US for the sake of bilateral relations. Hong Kong is part of China but enjoys considerable autonomy under the "one country, two systems" framework. Snowden told the Guardian he chose to go there because "they have a spirited commitment to free speech and the right of political dissent", and he believed it was one of the few places that could resist the US government. But he also noted: "I think it is really tragic that an American has to move to a place that has a reputation for less freedom. Still, Hong Kong has a reputation for freedom in spite of the People's Republic of China." He checked out of a hotel there to move to an unknown location last Monday, but told the South China Morning Post last week that he would stay and fight any request for his surrender in the territory's courts. "I'm neither traitor nor hero. I'm an American," he told the paper. Any surrender request would normally be the decision of the Hong Kong government, but Snowden would be able to challenge it through the territory's legal system, although lawyers think he would probably be unsuccessful in the end. In theory, Beijing could step in to stop him being sent back, but it would be unlikely to relish an all-out public row with the US. Earlier on Monday, the populist state-run Chinese tabloid The Global Times said that agreeing to surrender Snowden to the US "would be a face-losing outcome for both the Hong Kong SAR [special administrative region] government and the Chinese central government". It added: "Unlike a common criminal, Snowden did not hurt anybody. His crime is that he blew the whistle on the US government's violation of civil rights. "Extraditing Snowden back to the US would not only be a betrayal of Snowden's trust, but a disappointment for expectations around the world. The image of Hong Kong would be forever tarnished." The newspaper does not represent the official voice of the government and often runs provocative material such as hawkish commentaries from former military officers. But after years of criticism from the US over its human rights abuses and more recently hacking, Beijing appears to be enjoying its opportunity to turn the tables, with extensive coverage of Snowden's allegations on television and websites and in newspaper commentaries. According to the latest revelations from top secret documents uncovered by Snowden and seen by the Guardian, British intelligence agencies intercepted the communications of foreign politicians and officials who took part in two G20 summit meetings in London in 2009.