Russell Brand's appearance on MSNBC's Morning Joe show was a car crash all right, but you could see the collision coming a long way off. Put a quick, egotistical comedian into the glossy shambles of a breakfast show, and this is what you get. Brand looks to have come off much the better, but did he really? Did MSNBC even knew who they were booking? At times it didn't look like it. The interview starts off badly when host Mika Brzezinski introduces him by saying: "He's a really big deal, I'm told this … I'm not very up on pop culture." Brand looks instantly and justifiably pissed off. Then it gets worse. When Brzezinski leans forward to repair the collapsing table, Brand gets a jab of revenge in by commenting on her cleavage: "I'm only flesh and blood, I've got instincts." Panellist Brian Shachtman starts telling Brand he can't understand his accent, then the presenters talk about their guest in the third person for a bit, and Katty Kay (the second panellist) bafflingly calls him Willy Brand. At which point, Brand asks, "Is this what you do for a living?" and then takes over, plugging his tour direct to camera, and initiating a discussion about Edward Snowden and Bradley Manning, before finishing up by highlighting the way Brzezinski is clutching a water bottle and calling her a "shaft grasper". Many have praised Brand for his performance on the show, and it's certainly a showcase of everything he's got going for him. The bursts of insight smuggled in under the big hair and open shirt, the 10-mile high charisma, and the sharp edge of malice. Brand has got form when it comes to humiliating women – his previous maverick media exploits have included detailing the sex he had with a young woman on her grandfather's voicemail, remember – and he really goes for it here. Brzezinski makes a hash of presenting, but Brand goes way below the belt (ahem) when he smirkingly suggests she wants to wank him off. Ha ha, you have a uterus. Ha ha, you have tits. Ha ha, you're a lady so I bet you want to touch my cock. It feels odd to accuse Brand of laziness when he's so obviously energetic, but that's exactly what this kind of dull sexism is: lazy. Writing on Thatcher for the Guardian, his criticism of her seemed to revolve around what an unloving mother she must have been. He's got much better material than this, so I can only assume that he doesn't think a female opponent is worthy of his full comic majesty. (He allegedly didn't think his ex-wife was worthy of more than a text message to inform her he was divorcing her, so maybe there's a theme.) That old sexist Samuel Johnson said a woman's preaching was "like a dog's walking on his hind legs. It is not done well; but you are surprised to find it done at all." Brand is a kind of vertical hound himself: the rock star reprobate image is so well played, anything clever he says is applauded wildly for its novelty. But he is clever, and rather than letting him deploy that smartness as a tactic to ambush people, maybe we should ask him to be clever enough to treat women as people more of the time.