Leonardo Dicaprio in The Wolf Of Wall Street. Photograph: Universal/Red Granite Pictures The big story This week has been trailer week: the biggest things around, film-wise, have been a clutch of snappy little promos teeing up very different films. First we had the new Scorsese: The Wolf of Wall Street, with Leo DiCaprio doing a Goodfellas-style job on the trading-floor fatcat. That was followed by Frozen, Disney's Christmas cartoon; it's a (very loose) adaptation of The Snow Queen by Hans Christian Andersen. Then, biggest of all, the return of Ron Burgundy in Anchorman: The Legend Continues. We said it was kind of a big deal, and it is. In the news Star Wars: Episode VII – casting wishlist revealed Edward Snowden story on way to the big screen Films made in 3D are a marketing gimmick, says director Alan Parker 3D movie improves man's vision after lifetime of impairment Russell Crowe steeled for directing debut with The Water Diviner Man of Steel marketing campaign seeks to align Superman with Jesus Jennifer Lopez joins starry cast for Chilean miners movie Man of Steel breaks box office records on US release On the blog James Gandolfini: his film career in clips Zombie epic World War Z – another blockbuster turkey that refuses to die Samson and Delilah: a good effort at biblical sex and violence Clip joint: battle speeches The best films of 2013: what are your favourites so far? Austrian cinema: a province shaped by past masters of pessimism Man of Steel leaps predecessor in a single bound as waiting game pays off Cine-files: Skandia Theatre, Stockholm Watch and listen My Little Pony: Equestria Girls trailer – on the hoof? More like on the hooch 12 O'Clock Boys: trailer for new dirt-bike documentary - video Alan Partridge: Alpha Papa: watch the trailer - video Video on demand When China Met Africa Directors Marc and Nick Francis follows various Chinese enterprises underway in Zambia – from large-scale roadbuilding to small-scale crop-growing – and underscore the uneasy relationship between the two. Watch it on demand here. The Monastery: Mr Vig and the Nun An award-winning film about a millionaire who wants to establish a Russian Orthodox religious order in his castle. Watch it on demand here. The Punk Syndrome: watch the film on demand An upbeat documentary about a punk band from Finland, whose members are all learning-disabled. Watch it on demand here. • For more of the best independent, cult or classic films and documentaries chosen by Guardian Film, keep an eye on the Guardian screening room Further reading From the archives: Armando Iannucci on James Gandolfini Francesca Annis, actor – portrait of the artist Everlyn Sampi: pain, pride and the trail of the Rabbit-Proof Fence Before Midnight: 'what grown-up romantics have instead of lightsabers' Willem Dafoe: 'Don't make this into a crackpot profile, please' And finally Follow us on Twitter Like us on Facebook