Top eight stories on MediaGuardian Sunday People paid Nigella snapper £14,000 Photographer chose Trinity Mirror title as he believes it fills the gap left by the closure of the News of the World BSkyB blocking of BT Sports ad campaign 'legitimate', rules Ofcom Regulator dismisses complaint, as broadcaster 'pursued legitimate commercial interest' YouTube helps 100 advertisers build content Cannes Lions: Pilot including American Express and PepsiCo set to try to lure major companies away from TV ads Tumblr founder criticises rival social media Cannes Lions: David Karp says sharing of statistics, such as number of followers, is 'really gross' Daily Mail to pay £125,000 to TV psychic Paper apologises over article making untrue allegation that Sally Morgan used hidden earpiece to scam theatre audience Rolling Stones to broadcast one hour of Glastonbury set Deal reached with BBC over coverage of the veteran band's first-ever performance at the festival Howard Kurtz quits CNN to take up hosting job at Fox News Kurtz 'excited to bring my independent brand of media criticism to Fox News' in move that raises plenty of eyebrows Soundwave hopes to shake up music discovery on iPhone and Android Irish startup's app faces competition from Twitter #Music and others, but has Steve Wozniak and Stephen Fry in its corner Top comment on MediaGuardian Digital news is finally starting to pay Robert G Picard: Workable revenue models are emerging that make the future look brighter for publishers, a new report has found Today's headlines The Guardian Daily Mail pays out £125,000 in damages to 'psychic'. P5 Photographer got £14,000 for Nigella Lawson shots. P9 James Gandolfini dies. P10, 11 Nasa enlists smartphone users for cloud project. P20 Steve Coogan to publish memoir next year. P20 European privacy watchdogs tighten net on Google. P38 Samsung's new camera – or is it a phone? P39 Obituary: James Gandolfini. P46 Daily Telegraph Ban gag orders which try to silence whistleblowers, says watchdog. P2 Stones to roll on TV. P2 Andrew Marr's first public appearance since stroke. P7 Internet porn film shot on council car park. P9 Get-out for offensive tweets. P12 Civil servants disciplined for abuse of Facebook. P15 Comment: James Gandolfini. P19 Obituary: James Gandolfini. P29 Instagram video challenges Twitter. B1 Sky court victory draws first blood in battle with BT over sport. B3 Judge ready to determine bruising ebook battles of US titans. B5 France threatens to fine Google over privacy. B5 Financial Times Personal technology. P12 Google threatened on data privacy as European watchdogs bare teeth. P15 Pirate Bay hacker jailed for two years. P17 Facebook launches 'snackable' videos. P17 The Times Webcam hacking alert. P4 Nick Clegg on spot over failure to condemn Nigella Lawson 'assault'. P5 Comment: This may not be such a fleeting moment for Clegg. P5 Bad taste is not illegal, say new guidelines on social networking. P7 Rolling Stones back down over TV coverage of Glastonbury. P15 Hollwood mourns James Gandolfini. P17 Editorial: James Gandolfini. P30 Kim Dotcom data 'massacre'. P36 Steve Jobs: All my work will be obsolete by 2005. P40 Video comes to Instagram to put Vine out of the picture. P46 Obituary: James Gandolfini. P57 The Independent New wave of phone-hacking claims at the News of the World. P4 Sopranos star James Gandofini dies aged 51. P 8, 9 – Obit P48 Kim Dotcom's files are wiped clean in 'largest data massacre in history'. P19 New guidelines on social media published by DPP. P22 An hour of the Rolling Stones at Glastonbury will be broadcast on TV after compromise is reached. P22 Julian Sands says he's trying to 'broker a deal' for Edward Snowden. P22 Tumblr founder David Karp say his website has cut out 'the jerks' from social networking. P51 i Internet trolls to be let off if they apologise. P9 James Gandolfini dies. P16, 30, 31 BBC to show hour of Rolling Stones. P18 Trial starts for contract killing of Russian journalist. P19 TV psychic wins libel payment from Daily Mail. P27 Wall Street Journal Europe Google feels heat over data privacy in Europe. P4 Microsoft explored taking on Amazon. P19 Pressure rises for Nokia's CEO. P20 Samsung shows Galaxy S4 Mini. P21 Pirate Bay co-founder is sentenced to prison again. P21 RIM launches Q5 BlackBerry. P26 Deal talk cheap for Nokia. P32 Daily Mail Nigella Lawson emerges alone without her wedding ring. P11 The life of Sopranos star James Gandolfini. P15 Britain's Got Talent judge Alesha Dixon announces she's pregnant. P25 TV psychic Sally Morgan awarded damages over claims she used an earpiece. P30 Google is facing fines by French authorities for hoarding personal data. P39 Daily Express Fury as Nick Clegg says assault on Nigella Lawson 'was fleeting thing'. P9 Stars mourn as Sopranos star James Gandolfini dies at 51. P27 The Sun Rolling Stones get one hour on BBC at Glastonbury. P3 Nick Clegg's Nigella Lawson gaffe. P7 – Editorial. P8 James Gandolfini dies. P10, 11 Microsoft in U-turn on X-botch. P27 Daily Mirror Rolling Stone fans will be able to see an hour of their Glastonbury performance on TV. P9 Abuse groups slam Nick Clegg as he says choke was 'fleeting thing'. P10 James Gandolfini dies. P 14, 15 Britain's Got Talent judge Alesha Dixon announces she's pregnant. P17 Former Coronation Street actress Denise Black lands a role in Emmerdale. P31 Daily Star Big Brother coverage. P1, 5 James Gandolfini. P6 Nick Clegg's Nigella Lawson blunder. P22 Go to MediaGuardian