US senator Chuck Schumer said of Russia: 'That's not how allies should treat each other.' Photograph: Butsenko Anton/Corbis US politicians have attacked Vladimir Putin and called for Russia to hand over Edward Snowden, the former National Security Agency (NSA) contractor who admitted leaking top secret spying documents. The White House on Monday said it expected the Russian government to "look at all options available" to expel Snowden back to the US to face espionage charges. The White House National Security Council spokeswoman Caitlin Hayden said the US also registered strong objections to authorities in Hong Kong and China through diplomatic channels at the decision to let Snowden flee and "noted that such behavior is detrimental to US-Hong Kong and US-China bilateral relations". Hayden said that given the intensified c-ooperation between the US and Russia after the Boston Marathon bombings in April and a history of working together on law enforcement matters, the United States wanted Moscow to help on the Snowden case. "We expect the Russian government to look at all options available to expel Mr Snowden back to the US to face justice for the crimes with which he is charged," Hayden said. A senior administration official said Snowden's claim that he leaked details of the NSA's secret surveillance programs to protect democracy and individual rights is "belied by the protectors he has potentially chosen: China, Russia, Cuba, Venezuela and Ecuador". "His failure to criticise these regimes suggests that his true motive throughout has been to injure the national security of the US, not to advance internet freedom and free speech," the official said. As Snowden landed in Moscow after leaving Hong Kong, where the US had requested his arrest, leading Democratic senator Chuck Schumer accused the Russian president of sticking a finger in the eye of the US. "The bottom line is very simple: allies are supposed to treat each other in decent ways and Putin always seems almost eager to put a finger in the eye of the United States, whether it is Syria, Iran and now of course with Snowden," Schumer said on CNN's State of the Union. "That's not how allies should treat each other and I think it will have serious consequences for the United States-Russia relationship." Mike Rogers, chairman of the House permanent select committee on intelligence, told NBC's Meet The Press that he did not have information that Putin had prior knowledge of Snowden's flight plans but "it wouldn't surprise me". "Putin has been planting a thorn in the world's side in Syria. We think they may not be playing honest with respect to the nuclear treaty. They are very aggressive around the world," he said. "I'm sure they would love to have a little bit of coffee and some conversation with Mr Snowden." He added that the US should use "every legal avenue" to bring Snowden back to the US. "We will continue with extradition activities wherever he turns up." Rogers said the leaks had damaged national security and "bad guys overseas have changed the way they operate" as a result of the leaks. Republican senator Lindsey Graham told Fox News that Russia should "hold this fellow and send him back here for justice". "I don't think he's a hero, I believe he hurt our nation. He compromised the national security program designed to find out what terrorists were up to," he said. However, amid the backlash against Russia, politicians and others also rounded on the Obama administration. Graham questioned why Snowden was allowed to leave Hong Kong in the first place. "I'd like to find out why our papers were not in compliance. That would be a big mistake by the Department of Justice," he said. Republican senator Rand Paul attacked national intelligence director James Clapper, who earlier this month admitted to giving the "least untruthful" answer to Congress when asked about the extent of US surveillance of American citizens. Paul told CNN: "I think it is still going to be an open question with history about how this young man is judged. I do think when history looks at this they are going to contrast the behaviour of James Clapper, our national intelligence director, with Edward Snowden. Mr Clapper lied in Congress in defiance of the law in the name of security. Mr Snowden told the truth in the name of privacy." He said both had broken the law. On Saturday House Democratic leader Nancy Pelosi was booed by a crowd during a speech at activist meeting Netroots Nation when she said Snowden had broken the law. Pelosi was heckled as she spoke about the need to balance privacy and security. One man yelled: "It's not a balance, it makes us less safe." Another shouted: "You suck!"