The presence of two cars from the Ecuadorean embassy in Moscow at Sheremetevo airport has led to further speculation that Edward Snowden's final destination may be Ecuador. Photograph: Vasily Maximov/AFP/Getty Images Edward Snowden's flight from Hong Kong was last night has led to a debate on the relative merits of Ecuador and Venezuela as a refuge. Here's how the two shape. Venezuela Political cover Snowden would receive a warm welcome in Caracas, where the Venezuelan president, Nicolás Maduro, has maintained the anti-US rhetoric of his predecessor, Hugo Chávez. The country's huge oil reserves and strong regional alliances with other socialist nations in Latin America put it in a strong position to resist US demands for extradition. Presidential elections are not due for another six years, which means that - barring a coup, revolt or reversal of the last poll - Snowden should be guaranteed cover until at least 2018. Reputation impact In public relations terms for Snowden, Venezuela is riskier than Hong Kong, but safer than China. He previously said he had chosen Hong Kong, and thought of Iceland, for refuge because of their commitment to freedom of expression, but that consideration seems to have taken second place to personal safety. Although a democracy with regular, closely contested elections, the government in Caracas has squeezed private media hard. Venezuela is not seen as a strategic rival to the US, but it is widely depicted as hostile and repressive in terms of freedom of expression. Living standard Living comfortably and securely in Caracas is expensive. With one of the highest murder rates in the world and frequent kidnappings and robberies even at the main airport, personal safety is a major concern. Inequality and political polarisation are staggering. Many basic goods, most recently toilet paper, are in short supply. For the wealthy, however, there are restaurants, bars and golf clubs to match any in the world. Climate Venezuela enjoys a mild climate throughout the year, with tropical warmth tempered by altitude and sea breezes. It also has beautiful Caribbean beaches and Amazon forest. Ecuador Political cover Although Ecuador is relatively small, it has strong regional allies and economic support from China, which strengthens its ability to resist extradition requests. The country's president, Rafael Correa, has shown that he is not afraid of standing up to the US and Europe by granting asylum to the WikiLeaks founder, Julian Assange. WikiLeaks claimed on Sunday that it was helping Snowden to secure aslyum in "a democratic nation via a safe route". Correa has just been re-elected to a new four year term so Snowden's cover would likely last until at least 2017. Reputation impact Slightly less risky than Venezuela. Correa is less of a hate figure in the US than Chávez or Maduro. Ecuador is too small to be considered a threat, though its increasingly close ties to China might raise questions. Correa has been heavily criticised for cracking down on private media groups, though there is still a diverse range of opinion on TV and in newspapers. Living standard Quito is a stunning city high in the Andes with great food, decent internet, reasonable prices and easy access to Pacific beaches and Amazon forest. Crime rates are somewhat lower than Venezuela and inequality, though a major problem, is less apparent. Climate Quito's altitude of 2,800m (9,200ft) takes some getting used to. It has cool summers and mild winters, interspersed with the occasional mountain storm and lots of cloud cover.