9.05am AEST Good morning and welcome to our live coverage of the closing week of the 43rd parliament. Mike Bowers' opening picture for the blog this morning captures more eloquently than words can Julia Gillard's mood on this day, the third anniversary of her prime ministership. Let’s begin by walking through the main political stories of the morning. I’ve also included a link to an editorial from The Age newspaper over the weekend calling on the Prime Minister to step aside. I’m interested in reader’s views on that intervention. Kevin Rudd: time to put up or shut up Despite the consistently bad polls, Kevin Rudd appears to be cornered, as memories flood back of that night, three years ago today, when Julia Gillard and her supporters knifed him. Unless something unforeseen happens and assuming Gillard holds her nerve, if Rudd wants to reclaim the prize that was snatched away the onus will be on him to try to grab it. The leadership is not going to be handed to him in some consensus fashion. Either Rudd decides to front up and challenge or before week’s end, he concludes the numbers are not there and backs off, claiming he was never trying in the first place. (The Conversation) Poll wipeout for Labor Tony Abbott has opened his biggest lead ever over Julia Gillard as preferred prime minister as Labor's primary vote fell below 30 per cent for the first time in a year. With parliament entering its final sitting week before the election, the Opposition Leader now leads the Prime Minister by 12 percentage points after trailing by 30 points as the preferred prime minister when Ms Gillard became leader in June 2010. Facing increasing pressure to step down as Labor leader in favour of Kevin Rudd by the end of the week, Ms Gillard's support as preferred prime minister dropped from 35 to 33 in the latest Newspoll survey, conducted exclusively for The Australian on the weekend. The pressure is continuing to mount on Ms Gillard, with Rudd backers maintaining the Prime Minister has lost the confidence of caucus and the leadership crisis will be decided late this week. (The Australian, paywalled) An internal ALP report containing polling for 40 seats across Australia, and circulated among selected members of Julia Gillard's leadership group, shows Labor would be lucky to retain 30 to 35 seats after the election. But the report has not been shared with most Labor MPs. (The Daily Telegraph) Newspaper intervenes in the leadership It is time for Julia Gillard to stand aside as leader of the federal parliamentary Labor Party, as Prime Minister of Australia, so that vigorous, policy-driven democratic debate can flourish once again. Ms Gillard should do so in the interests of the Labor Party, in the interests of the nation and, most importantly, in the interests of democracy. The Age's overriding concern is that, under Ms Gillard's leadership, the Labor Party's message about its future policies and vision for Australia is not getting through to the electorate. (The Age, Editorial) Australia’s 40th casualty in Afghanistan Fighting in Afghanistan continues to take a grim toll on the bravest of Australia's soldiers with another decorated Digger killed in a shootout with insurgents. The as yet unnamed commando, one of the army's highly experienced special forces patrol commanders with a fierce tradition of leading from the front, was the 40th Australian soldier killed in the 11-year conflict. (The Australian, paywalled) Gillard on confidence Julia Gillard will on Monday lash out at media coverage of the Australian economy, slamming what she calls “unreasonable pessimism” that threatens to undermine confidence, and hurt jobs and growth. The Prime Minister will urge participants at a major annual two-day conference starting in Canberra, to “challenge the negative economic sentiment that is around in some quarters. As Prime Minister, I am concerned that left unchecked, this kind of distorted coverage could continue to spread,” she is expected to say in an opening address to the Committee for Economic Development of Australia’s State of the Nation forum. (Australian Financial Review, paywalled) Another poll - the Lowy Institute poll - with contradictory attitudes to China A survey has found Australians continue to have warm feelings toward Great Britain, Germany and the United States, but rate their feelings toward China and Indonesia as not so hot. (ABC) Edward Snowdon Edward Snowdon was five hours into his flight from Hong Kong, having already been served one of two hot meals, when news of his departure to Moscow began to electrify media organisations all over the world. The Hong Kong authorities waited until Snowden was safely out of Chinese airspace before sending out a short press release that confirmed the intelligence whistle-blower had been allowed to leave on Aeroflot flight SU213, bound for Russia. (Guardian Australia) WikiLeaks publisher Julian Assange on Sunday confirmed his organisation's involvement in Mr Snowden's sudden departure from Hong Kong ahead of US government efforts to secure his extradition on espionage and other charges arising from the leak of top secret US National Security Agency surveillance programs. "Mr Snowden is flying in an Aeroflot aircraft over Russian airspace, accompanied by WikiLeaks legal advisers," Mr Assange said. (Fairfax Media) Mandela critical Nelson Mandela is in a critical condition in hospital, officials said on Sunday, leaving millions of South Africans fearing the worst. The 94-year-old former president has been hospitalised four times since December but this is by far the gravest report on his health. You can follow the live updates here throughout the day, or join in the conversation on Twitter using the hashtag #politicslive You can follow me on Twitter @murpharoo Updated at 9.07am AEST