Top eight stories on MediaGuardian UK mobile ads set to grow by 90% in 2013 Mobile ad market predicted to rise from £526m in 2012 to £1bn as digital giants mine smartphone, tablet and app revolution Edward Snowden leaves reporters chasing shadows US whistleblower's rumoured arrival then non-departure from Russia leaves many in Moscow asking: was he ever even here? BBC journalist received 'threatening' tweets in Turkey Broadcaster condemns messages sent by Ankara mayor to reporter Selin Girit Experts warn over romanticising Jeremy Forrest case NSPCC says media must be careful of presenting teacher-pupil relationship as love story Castle apologises to Lloyd over LTA comments BBC presenter pays damages over suggestion that 'personal problems' could affect CEO appointment Sun editor backs staff facing investigation David Dinsmore says he is aware of 'emotional toll' as nine of paper's journalists face charges under Met police's Operation Elveden 'It's staggering retailers sell lads' mags' UK Feminista founder Kat Banyard on her battle to stop Tesco and other stores from stocking publications such as Zoo and Loaded Time Team's Mick Aston dies The archaeologist and broadcaster, who found fame with the Channel 4 series, has passed away aged 66 Top comment on MediaGuardian Dumb Ways to Die: 10 great Australian adverts Allie Townsend: Dumb Ways to Die has been garlanded with awards at Cannes. But which other Australian ads make television commercial breaks bearable? Today's headlines The Guardian Media's hunt for NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden proves fruitless. P3 Sideways star to join cast of Downton Abbey. P7 Vodafone offers £6.5bn to buy biggest German cable company. P24 UK mobile advertising market set to double. P25 Daily Telegraph Paul Giamatti joins Downton Abbey. P5 Interview with the BBC's Peter Horrocks. P30 Financial Times Culture secretary seeks broadband revamp. P3 Photo-sharing app Snapchat valued at $800m in funding round. P18 Google warns on tougher regulation. P22 The Times Celebrities back Alexander Lebedev. P33 The Independent Vodafone in Kabel takeover. P52 i How British executives conquered American media. P17 Charlotte Raven unveils shortlist of potential titles for Spare Rib relaunch. P17 Vodafone offers £6.5bn to buy biggest German cable company. P42 Wall Street Journal Europe Vodafone makes offer for Kabel. P19,21 Telefónica agrees to sell Irish operation. P21 Facebook working on news application. P22 Interview: Spotify's Daniel Ek. P29 Daily Mail iPhone 5 fails speed test. P24 Daily Express Vodafone in bid for Kabel. P50 The Sun Facebook apologises after bug exposes millions of users' details. P7 Paul Giamatti joins Downton Abbey. TVbiz, P1 Daily Mirror Ian Hyland on The Voice. P13 Glastonbury boss Michael Eavis says he will stick with the BBC despite offers from other broadcasters. P18 Daily Star Big Brother coverage. P1,4-5 Go to MediaGuardian