Challenge of digital economy Suzanne Moore's digital economy piece (14 June) is interesting, but her comparison between Kodak and Instagram betrays a lack of understanding of how these digital economy companies work. Instagram had only 13 employees at the time of Jaron Lanier's book, Who Owns the Future?, because Instagram does not do very much itself. The startup economy is a recent development made possible only because of huge advancements in hosted services. Instagram only needs a tiny engineering team, but the service Instagram provides needs far more. There is a large middle class associated with services provided by Instagram, and I'm a part of it: the engineers who maintain services and software that these startups rely on. I agree with Moore that societies should place a fair value on work, and understand the importance of a financially secure middle class. But this is a challenge of political and social will, and it is a mistake to segue into the Luddite tendency. There will always be new technologies that render old occupations obsolete; history has shown that this results not in a Luddite dystopia of poverty and starvation, nor the futurist utopia of a permanently leisured human class served by its machines, but simply in human ingenuity inventing new forms of occupation. The challenge is to ensure that our polities are structured such that these new forms of occupation do not increase inequality. The nature of technological change is unimportant; the challenge of the digital economy is just the same as the challenge of the Industrial Revolution and no doubt will be the same as whatever the next big wave of technological change turns out to be – AI journalism, perhaps? Adam Williamson Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada The EU is good for Britons When reading John Harris's article on Ukip on the March (14 June), I thought that so many people who constantly express pride in all things British seem to assume that all British people feel the same way. This could not be further from the truth. I looked at the statistics for 2009-10: 567,000 people arrived in the UK and 371,000 moved overseas. These are modest figures compared with the 29 million Romanians and Bulgarians who might, if Ukip are right, come to the UK under the auspices of the EU. A headline figure, maybe, but one only to scare people. I married a person from the former German Democratic Republic in 1994-95 and we decided that it was more appropriate for me to join my new family in Saxony, Germany, than for them to move to the UK. One additional factor was my total discontent with Thatcherism and its later John Major version, which had so influenced the way in which I did my work in one of the caring professions. I have no homesickness and have never regretted the decision I took almost 20 years ago. As a citizen of the UK and the EU, I benefit enormously from the provisions that relate to those like me living in an EU country other than their own, and would be harmed if Britain departed from the EU. If Ukip ever comes to power, I'm sure I will feel even happier that I left Britain's shores. Michael Booth Kassel, Germany Vested interests doom Syria I agree with Charles Glass that the Syrian conflict is unlikely to be resolved, except through tough negotiations (Pity the unfortunate citizens of Syria, 14 June). Sadly, though, the involvement of the two major players, Russia and the US, is less to do with halting the massacre and more to do with serving their own interests. The same approach was taken in Afghanistan a quarter of a century ago, when the US armed the Afghan mujahideen to see off the Russian army, only to land itself in a deeper quagmire, full of the Taliban. It does make one very cynical when the superpowers turn a conflict into a tug of war, instead of applying wisdom and generosity of spirit to rescue a desperate population. Shmaiel Nona Burradoo, NSW, Australia How to thwart the snoopers I have a very simple solution to the unthinkable intrusion by the US National Security Agency into people's private lives (14 June). AOL, Apple, Facebook, Google, Microsoft, YouTube and Yahoo, not to mention Prism and Boundless Informant? Forget them all and bring together four simple items that fortunately are not yet obsolete – pen, paper, envelope and stamp – and do what I do. Commit your most nefarious plotting and planning, the details of your deepest and darkest secret weapons of mass destruction, your schemes to annihilate the world, on to paper and then seal them safely inside the envelope and post them off. Safe as houses. Or does the NSA have some kind of MRI system that can scrutinise the content of a sealed envelope? If this is the case, we'll have to resort to telepathy. Annie Didcott Chifley, ACT, Australia • I am amazed that no one has pointed out the irony that Edward Snowden has sought the protection of a country where, if he had revealed such "state secrets", the authorities would have locked him up and thrown away the key. R Coates Hong Kong • The question is not whether someone is intercepting my emails. The only question is, who? When I am conspiring against the government, I use my employer's email system; when I am conspiring against my employer, I switch to Gmail. David Josephy Guelph, Ontario, Canada It's all about politics Bravo for José Rodrigues dos Santos's article, Can Agatha Christie be political? (7 June). It makes one think outside the tiny box into which most newspapers, TV pundits and social scientists put politics. That box contains government, politicians, political parties, lobbyists and the like. It doesn't have religions, corporations, universities, non-government organisations, families and so on. Those entities are supposedly not political, unless they or people in them do malicious, unseemly or self-serving things - then they're "political". Here comes another strength of Dos Santos's article: it links politics to ideas, concepts and behaviour that can be good, moral and beneficial. Politics is about controlling, allocating, producing and using resources, and the values and ideas underlying those activities. We all do these things; we're all political. Better to be conscious of that than to think what we do isn't political. Ben Kerkvliet Honolulu, Hawaii, US Nasa finally sees the light It is reassuring that Nasa has concerns for radiation exposure in space (Dispatches, 14 June). Not always so. Starting in 1958 Project Orion (now declassified) sought a round-trip to Mars in 124 days with a crew of 150. What may seem gonzo now was a deadly serious endeavour: a 16-storey vessel would have been catapulted up through the atmosphere by detonating an array of nuclear blasts underneath it; space propulsion would have been achieved via 2,000 sequential "small-sized" bombs bumping it along. This boondoggle of Darpa (of star-wars defence fame) would have launched from the ever-secret Nevada Test Site, even then a hopelessly radioactive wasteland. Believed feasible for a decade, the engineering was later orphaned to the Air Force and reconfigured as an orbiting battleship to "go toe-to-toe with the Russkies" in space. The Partial Test Ban Treaty of 1963 put it into limbo. R M Fransson Denver, Colorado, US It's just too damned long Your feature on Bandwurmwörter (14 June) brought back a story, no doubt apocryphal, told by my German teacher. It appears that the original German word for a tank may have been Schuetzengrabenvernichtungskraftwagen, a mere 37 letters, or 36 with the umlaut. The literal translation is: motor vehicle for the annihilation of protective ditches. Rommel's failure to capture Tobruk in 1941 was in part due to the inevitable delay in sending the following plea for reinforcements, in Morse Code: Siebzigtausend Schuetzengrabenvernichtungskraftwagen dringend erforderlich bei Tobruk bitte. Immediately after this debacle, an edict from Adolf Hitler decreed that henceforth the word in German would be der Tank. Noel Bird Boreen Point, Queensland, Australia Briefly • Am I missing something? Eighty-six prisoners at Guantánamo Bay have been cleared for release, and have been for some considerable time (7 June). So, what is the problem with giving them a travel voucher to their chosen destination, a reasonable sum of subsistence cash and a lift to the travel starting point? I mean, just do it, for goodness' sake. Innocents should not be incarcerated further, once declared innocent. Or is there something simple I have overlooked? Ian M Cameron Auckland, New Zealand • One of the many things I appreciate about Guardian Weekly is its frank attitude when it comes to the more colourful side of the English language. I refer, in this case, to Sam Leith's book review of Holy Sh*t by Melissa Mohr (14 June). In the unlikelihood of this article being published in, say, the Daily Mail, it would be so full of asterisks as to render it bl***y, f***ing unreadable. Kim van Hoorn Tarn, France • Rarely have I ever read anything more sane and wonderful: Jay Griffiths has said out loud about parenting what most women know deep down in their hearts (31 May). Thanks for publishing this piece of wisdom; it will hopefully start parents thinking before inflicting years of damage that starts with controlled crying and is followed by controlled everything else. Ailsa Cuthbert Gisborne, New Zealand Please send letters to weekly.letters@guardian.co.uk