A TV screen shows a news report on NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden, who has flown to Moscow, at a shopping mall in Hong Kong on Sunday. Photograph: Vincent Yu/AP Back in 2010, when a Russian spy ring was uncovered in the US, Vladimir Putin was asked if he knew who betrayed them. He said that he knew the traitors by name. He went on to add: "Traitors always come to no good, they end up in a ditch either drunk or overdosed on drugs. The other day one such traitor kicked the bucket exactly like that, abroad. And there is no point doing it, really." If you take away the understandable anger and humiliation of an ex-intelligence officer having to comment on a battle his agency lost, you hear a point being made. And that point is much like the one you from hear from NSA chief General Keith Alexander or anyone else in the intelligence community when they speak of those who expose their secrets, be it traitors like the one who supposedly turned in the Russian spies or whistleblowers like Edward Snowden. A spook himself, Putin can relate more to the NSA chief and those trying to hunt down Snowden, than to anyone who considers the whistleblower a hero. But while Snowden's actions are considered treason by Russia's predominately ex-KGB elite, to them he is still a valuable asset. Just not for the intel he might possess. There's been a lot of speculation as to what Russia might want from Snowden – secret docs, NSA access codes or his knowledge of the American intelligence community. But the reality is that his "intel" – priceless to the American public – is the last reason why Russia got on the "Snowden train". That's because a country with such a massive intelligence apparatus doesn't need a celebrity whistleblower to tell them about PRISM. Russian intelligence has waged a covert war against the very institutions Snowden exposed for the better part of the 20th century. The over-exaggerated "treasure chest" of secrets the world presumes Snowden's laptop to be is of no use to the Russian government since they have their own (albeit weaker) NSA with spies, satellites, cryptography specialists, and a general understanding of an intelligence agency's modus operandi that is far beyond that of any journalist or civilian in the US. Official Moscow may have a hard time grasping the basic principles of democracy, but it sure knows a thing or two about intelligence gathering. So no PRISM, Tempora, Verizon court orders or, say, a secret program that installs NSA modules into TiVo sets for tracking al-Qaida based on TV preferences is of any interest (or surprise) to the Russian government. What they do care about is sticking it to the US any way they can. And Snowden is just the guy they need. At a time when its "superpower options" are exhausted, but its Cold War mentality is still prevalent, the only way for Russia to be safely recognized as a legitimate "foe" of the United States is by doing small things that irritate, but don't necessarily hurt the US. Harboring someone the US considers a fugitive is one of them. That way Russia can have an insignificant, yet highly publicized conflict without actually risking anything. Letting Snowden spend the night in Moscow (supposedly not even on Russian soil) and providing the logistics is far from the stuff Soviets used to do, but it is an effective way to let Russia be heard, even if has nothing to say. Moscow getting involved in the Snowden affair is part of a larger strategy of photobombing anything that's being played out in the international scene, regardless of its actual usefulness – political or ideological – to the Kremlin. Does Moscow support whistleblowers or free speech? Judging by the number of body bags with those who went against the Russian government, we all know that answer. What it does support is pestering the US any way it can. To understand this peculiar trait of Russian foreign policy one doesn't have to be a Kremlinologist. All you have to do is turn on Russia Today, and the state-run TV network is going to do the rest. What started as a dull propaganda channel devoted to the joys of living in Siberian permafrost, turned into a worldwide media network committed to exposing the horrors of living in the United States. Political superfreaks, conspiracy theorists, and pretty much everyone with some level of contempt for the US government or the American way of life got a chance to speak their mind on Russia Today. Moscow's approach to its relations with Washington isn't that different. When an opportunity like Snowden appears on the horizon, the Kremlin is sure to act on it. It might be hypocritical, useless, and none of Russia's business in the first place. But as long as "Moscow vs Washington" is going to be a media trend in Russia, and the US government is going to be annoyed and frustrated.