12.15pm ET China joins Russia in protesting that it has been ill-used in the Snowden affair. China's top state newspaper praised Snowden Tuesday for "tearing off Washington's sanctimonious mask" and rejected accusations Beijing had facilitated Snowden's departure from Hong Kong, The Guardian's Jonathan Kalman reports from Beijing: The strongly worded front-page commentary in the overseas edition of the People's Daily, the official newspaper of the Chinese Communist party, responded to harsh criticism of China from the US for allowing Snowden to flee. [...] "Not only did the US authorities not give us an explanation and apology, it instead expressed dissatisfaction at the Hong Kong special administrative region for handling things in accordance with law," wrote Wang Xinjun, a researcher at the Academy of Military Science in the People's Daily commentary. "In a sense, the United States has gone from a 'model of human rights' to 'an eavesdropper on personal privacy', the 'manipulator' of the centralised power over the international internet, and the mad 'invader' of other countries' networks," the People's Daily said. Meanwhile the Hong Kong government is defending its explanation for why Snowden was allowed to leave. "We don't buy it," White House spokesman Jay Carney said Monday. The Guardian's Tania Branigan reports from Hong Kong: Hong Kong's justice secretary has insisted officials did not deliberately delay processing the request for Snowden's arrest, blaming the United States for not providing Snowden's "full" passport number and failing to clarify his full name.  Rimsky Yuen Kwok-keung said that made it impossible for his department to ask a judge to approve a provisional arrest warrant, according to the South China Morning Post. Yuen insisted: “And any suggestion that we deliberately let Mr Snowden get away and had done anything to obstruct normal operations is totally untrue...We had not been deliberately delaying the process.” He said US documents used the name Edward James Snowden, the US Department of Justice referred to him as Edward J Snowden, and Hong Kong’s Immigration Department had him recorded as Edward Joseph Snowden, Yuen said. “I couldn’t say the three names were consistent, so we needed further clarification. Otherwise, there would have been legal problems with a provisional arrest warrant,” Yuen said.