9.05am AEST Good morning and welcome to our live coverage of politics from Canberra. There are stirrings in Rudd central - a petition is expected to emerge today in an effort to bring Labor’s leadership saga to some sort of conclusion over the next 48 hours. The Prime Minister is doing what she does in these situations: fight. Speaking of fight, MPs started early today with a football game outside the parliament - getting into the combat spirit. Mike Bowers, bless him, was there. The result is readers can enjoy Anthony Albanese and Barnaby Joyce indulging their rugby league hero fantasies. But this one is all about friendship. Later today, MPs will establish a parliamentary friendship group for rugby league. Let’s run through the major political stories this morning. Leadership Julia Gillard will deny her MPs a secret vote in a special caucus meeting expected to be called as early as today to spill the Labor leadership - an unprecedented move to protect her position. In a warning to Kevin Rudd's supporters that they would have to blast her out of office, the PM's office yesterday suggested any vote to remove her would have to be by a show of hands. (The Daily Telegraph) A petition of one-third of caucus ­members is under active consideration by Labor MPs eager to force a leadership change but unable to break the impasse caused by Kevin Rudd’s refusal to challenge and Julia Gillard’s refusal to step down. With just two days of Parliament to go and Mr Rudd scheduled to fly to China on Thursday afternoon, a group of MPs who are trying to force a spill but are frustrated with Mr Rudd’s reluctance to challenge, were discussing the drastic option of the petition. (The Australian Financial Review, paywalled) Julia Gillard is preparing for a showdown with Kevin Rudd as early as tomorrow, warning Labor MPs they will have to tear her down in an open show of hands in caucus to force a ballot on the leadership. The Prime Minister's supporters are preparing for the Rudd camp to deliver a petition signed by one third of caucus to force a special meeting of MPs to debate the leadership. But under caucus rules, MPs could be forced to vote on a show of hands to force a leadership spill, which would then be conducted by secret ballot. (The Australian, paywalled) Oakeshott retires Rob Oakeshott, the member for Lyne for the past five years, is retiring from politics. After 17 years in public life – and three of them at the very heart of one of Australia’s most turbulent political times – Mr Oakeshott will not contest the 2013 election. “Now is the moment,” he said. “I have done everything I said I was going to do – and done the best I can. Now it’s up to others to try and do better. Port Macquarie News 457 visas The government is facing a battle to get the bill through the lower house, where it needs to secure support from at least five of the seven crossbench MPs. Time is running out because the bill is earmarked for debate in the Senate on Thursday, before Parliament rises for the September election. The government is trying to find common ground among the crossbench MPs, some of whom are pulling in different directions. (Fairfax Media) Snowden - Russia confirms the whistleblower is still there - and … American intelligence whistle-blower Edward Snowden may expose top secret Australian intelligence gathering operations and embarrass Australia's relations with neighbouring Asian countries, Australian intelligence officials fear. (Fairfax Media) Asylum Australian rescue authorities did not comply with their obligations to send emergency broadcasts or start a search for an asylum-seeker boat which sank in waters between Indonesia and Christmas Island with the loss of 112 lives, a coronial inquest has been told. Indonesia's search and rescue authority Basarnas was also sharply criticised for its inaction after a series of distress calls from the Kaniva, an Indonesian fishing boat with 212 male asylum-seekers from Afghanistan, Pakistan and Iran on board, which had left Java on June 18 last year. (The Australian, paywalled) Unaccompanied minors on asylum-seeker boats are arriving with "high rates" of sexually transmitted diseases, fuelling concerns that proper child protection procedures are not being followed. As a government-appointed advisory committee was told that Immigration Department staff lacked a "clear understanding" of child protection practices, the evidence of STDs among children seeking asylum prompted calls for condoms to be made available at "discreet locations" at the Christmas Island detention centre. (The Australian, paywalled) Obama on climate change President Barack Obama proposed a sweeping plan to address climate change on Tuesday that sets goals to reduce carbon emissions and bolster renewable energy while also preparing the country for the impacts of a warming planet. "Americans all across the country are already paying the cost of inaction," Mr Obama said in an address at at Georgetown University in Washington. "The question now is whether we will have the courage to act before it's too late." (Fairfax Media) Hazel Hawke - David Marr’s lovely piece An air of truce hangs over memorial services. Old enemies find themselves sitting cheek by jowl. They chat. They make do. But the truce at Hazel Hawke's memorial service in the Concert Hall of the Opera House didn't extend to Julia Gillard and Kevin Rudd. (Guardian Australia) You can follow live updates throughout the day on the blog, or join in the conversation on Twitter using the hashtag #politicslive You can follow me there @murpharoo