Top eight stories on MediaGuardian News International rebrands as News UK UK newspaper operation, which includes the Times, Sunday Times and the Sun, changes name in wake of phone-hacking scandal Lawyers in US News Corp hacking suit working with more potential victims Lawyers representing Angelina Jolie's sometimes stuntwoman are part of first case for alleged hacking in the US courts Charlotte Moore's BBC1 role 'a very critical appointment', says Tony Hall Director general confirms documentaries commissioning editor will head flagship channel and praises her 'ideas and vision' Whistleblowers will continue to leak state secrets, warns AP chief President of global news agency says Obama administration cannot control flow of leaks in wake of Edward Snowden case Stuart Hall victim: I feel I was set up Woman says members of presenter's BBC entourage were complicit in assault Lord Justice Leveson to be invited to give evidence to MPs Commons select committee likely to ask judge about standoff between politicians and industry over new press watchdog Sir John Hegarty: web threatening profile of TV ads Cannes Lions: Comments by jury president follow awards for Dumb Ways to Die and other long-form commercials George Osborne's high-speed broadband plan ends in vouchers Chancellor's scheme to spend £150m on broadband infrastructure has been scaled back following legal challenges Top comment on MediaGuardian TV commissioners: an 'uncreative crust'? Maggie Brown: Former BBC executive Tom Archer claims commissioning is dominated by people with no experience of programme-making Today's headlines The Guardian Eddy Shah denies sleeping with girl but admits paying co-defendant for sex. P4 Louis Theroux impersonator spared prison. P5 Charlotte Moore set to be confirmed as BBC1 controller. P13 Stuart Hall victim speaks out as she prepares to launch civil action. P15 Google does not have to remove personal data, EU court told. P24 George Osborne's broadband plan scaled back dramatically. P28 Daily Telegraph Mobile advertising spend to double this year. Business P1 Google not obliged to delete personal data from searches. Business P5 Financial Times BBC raises £170m bond to finance BBC Worldwide in US. P2 Google will not have to remove personal data from search results. P18 The Times Tim Berners-Lee says governments should stop snooping. P1 Lord Justice Leveson to be called for questioning in MPs investigating press regulation. P6 BBC raises £170m bond. P35 UKTV signs deal for catchup services with YouView. P36 The Independent Snapchat app valued at $800m - but how long will it last? P3 Lord Justice Leveson to be tackled by MPs. P8 QI creator threatens to take the show online. P12 Local council bans loan websites from all its public computers. P28 Alexander Lebedev trial verdict due next week. P35 Obituary: TV archaeologist Mick Aston. P46 i Australian safety campaign scoops record number of industry prizes. P3 Life In Brief: TV archaeologist Mick Aston. P12 QI producer John Lloyd threatens to take show online. P17 Four satellites launched to bringer faster internet access to under connected countries. P19 Photo-sharing app Snapchat soars in value to $800m. P21 Man who conned pub staff into believing he was Louis Theroux gets community order. P23 Barnes & Noble to stop making colour e-readers. P41 Wall Street Journal Europe Google gets boost in EU privacy case. P19,21 Condé Nast launches French Vanity Fair. P19 Sony aims to overcome delay in mobile. P20 Macbook Air and Sony Vaio Pro compared. P29 Daily Mail Internet search engines could replace the census. P3 ASA bans diet scam internet adverts. P13 Lord Justice Leveson is summoned by MPs to answer inquiry questions. P18 Time Team star Mick Aston has dies at 66. P35 Daily Express YouView signs deal for more catchup services. P28 Louis Theroux impersonator spared prison. P30 The Sun Lord Justice Leveson to be asked to give evidence to MPs. P2 Sony launches giant Xperia Z Ultra smartphone. P21 Louis Theroux impersonator spared prison. P31 Paul O'Grady to guest on Holby City. TV Biz P1 The Apprentice coverage. TV Biz P1 TV magician Dynamo 'irked by Sherlock stunt'. TV Biz P2-3 EastEnders to launch online spin-off. TV Biz P2 Channel 4's testicles documentary is a ratings hit. TV Biz P3 ITV's Take Me Out to go on tour. TV Biz P3 Daily Mirror Lord Justice Leveson called to appear before MPs over inquiry omission. P12 Brit who used online chat website to blackmail young girls is caught by US police. P15 Tributes paid to Time Team archaeologist after his death aged 66. P22 A man who pretended to be TV star Louis Theroux given community order. P24 Daily Star Jimmy Saville police on alert following Big Brother fight. P5 Nigella Lawson fans support her during her marriage turmoil by cooking her recipes. P4 Former Big Brother winner Pete Bennett is a TV star in America. P23 Emmerdale actor reveals a stalker has left him fearing for his life. P26 Go to MediaGuardian