The Crucible: Melbourne Theatre Company's production of Arthur Miller's play is wholly depoliticised. Photograph: MTC Watching – or, more precisely, listening to – Melbourne Theatre Company's production of The Crucible, it's striking how pertinent Arthur Miller's parable of social paranoia remains. Miller's great tragedy about the Salem witch trials was a response to McCarthyism, the anti-Communist hysteria which gripped the US at the height of the Cold War. Written at the height of his dramatic powers, The Crucible is one of the four great plays in which Miller's ever-present urge towards didacticism is tempered by a passionate fascination with human frailty and contradiction. Here the domestic and the political ignite a volatile engine that drives towards a cathartic revelation of civil and judicial wrong. Miller's genius in The Crucible is his investigation of social terror as a communal contagion. What fascinated him most of all, a knowledge that the playwright wrote "underlies every word of The Crucible", was the fact that "a political, objective, knowledgeable campaign from the far Right was capable of creating not only a terror, but a new subjective reality". As Miller put it in a note in the play: "The repressions of order seemed heavier than the dangers against which the order was organised".   Those "repressions of order" today include the mass public surveillance as revealed by Edward Snowden, and the trials of whistleblowers such as Bradley Manning. Once again, public order is in conflict with private conscience in "a new subjective reality".   This makes it all the more mystifying that Sam Strong's production for the MTC should almost wholly depoliticise the play, presenting The Crucible as a remote historical drama. This is more than a failure of political insight: the emotional stakes in this production are so wanly drawn that audience members were still laughing at the superstitious Puritans in the third act. Dale Ferguson's design – abstract white houses aggressively dumped on a floor of black earth – perhaps sounded good in principle, a concrete visualisation of the claustrophobic black and white morality of Puritanism. But for three acts, the effect is to strangle the action on the Sumner's large playing area to a stage-within-a-stage of around three square metres, on which actors are arranged in various tableaux. The design only begins to pay off in the final act, when the confined domestic space is removed and at last the actors begin to find dynamic relationship.   In a much anticipated appearance as John Proctor, the flawed and tormented farmer whose wife is accused of witchcraft by his former lover, David Wenham is surprisingly wooden. It has to be said that Wenham is not helped by his historical costuming; he stands around heroically, looking like a lost extra in The Lord of the Rings. The heartbreaking scene between Proctor and his wife Elizabeth (Anita Hegh), an encounter raw with unspoken betrayal and inarticulate love, is rushed through like so much soap opera. The whole is so poorly orchestrated, its emotional nuance so blurred, that it's hard not to hold the director to account for problems with the acting. Strong has an excellent cast and an impeccable script at his disposal, and the production still has its moments. Brian Lipson as Deputy Governor Danforth holds the courtroom drama together in act three with an authorative performance, in the face of more puzzling design that literally conceals most of the stage. Grant Cartwright gives an impassioned and intelligent portrayal of the conscience-stricken Reverend Hale, and Hegh is working her butt off as Elizabeth Proctor, the falsely accused wife. In the final act, in which the actors are lushly lit out of encroaching shadow by Paul Jackson, you begin to see a potential vision: the tableaux unfreeze and become living scenes. But by then little is at stake. Perhaps this production's worst misstep is that it possesses no palpable feeling of fear: from the beginning, there is little sense in the production of the sexual and emotional repressions at work in this enclosed society.   But this is a play about terror. It is fear that causes the repressions that explode so floridly into social and judicial madness, fear that must cast out and destroy those who dare to differ from the norm. Stripped of its driving emotional force and its wider political implications, The Crucible becomes so much historical kitsch.