America the super-snooper. It may well be an apt turn of phrase, based on the latest revelations from NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden. Not only has the US been spying on its own citizens, but now we learn that intelligence services have been peaking electronically into the European Union's mission in New York and embassy in Washington. One document lists 38 embassies and missions, describing them as "targets". Along with traditional ideological adversaries and sensitive Middle Eastern countries, we find the US has been peering in on Greece, France, Italy, Japan, Mexico, South Korea, India and Turkey. Read all about it on our front page, and inside too. Of course, there's much more online, which you can access by clicking here. Inside the paper, we find Egypt is back on the brink, and president Mohamed Morsi clinging to control. As protesters return to Tahrir Square, and the military demands a resolution to the unrest, we take a look, though analysis and comment, at the people, politics and power ploys underway in Cairo. From Africa, David Smith reports on Barack Obama's tour, which included a visit to Robben Island, where Nelson Mandela was imprisoned for 18 years. It's a poignant piece of reporting as the 94-year-old former president of South Africa remained critically ill on Tuesday in a Pretoria hospital. From the courts, we report on a historic day for US gay rights, as the supreme court rules the Defence of Marriage Act to be unconstitutional. Still with the Americas, in Chile, the battles lines are set as protesters press for an overhaul of that country's political system. Guardian Middle East editor Ian Black analyses a leadership shift in Qatar, Alison Rourke reports on the downfall of Australia's Julia Gillard, and Portugal suffers as its birthrate plummets. That's just a sampling of stories from around the globe this week. Gary Younge kicks off our Comment section, arguing that racism in America is far from dead. From the UK, Andrew Rawnsley says the biggest problem for the Labour Party is one of credibility. And, more than halfway through Wimbledon, our In Praise Of column lauds the joys of tennis on grass. Sit back and digest our deeper read section, which looks at the ancient Buddhist city of Mes Aynak in Afghanistan, which is in jeopardy from the vast copper wealth beneath it. From there, we shift to the Philippines, where development is clashing with culture, and over to Vienna, where a cycling culture has been duly embraced. The Books pages bring a final interview with author Iain Banks, who in May spoke of all the things he still had to do. It's a very moving two pages. Culture checks out hip-hop in Les Halles, in Paris, and discovers what a skateboarding mecca at London's concrete-clad Southbank Centre has in common with a traditional English village green. More than you might expect, it turns out! Good to Meet You goes to Vanuatu, and a pleasant journey it is. On a journey of a different kind, Glastonbury has just concluded. The mud dried, the sun shone, the temperatures rose, and the Rolling Stones proved to festival-goers that sometimes you can get what you want. I saw the Stones for the first time nearly 20 years ago at the Tokyo Dome, thinking there would be few other opportunities. Who knew how wrong I'd be? Still, the photo and story on our UK news pages made me smile. I hope you find the edition a source of great satisfaction. Would you like to change your delivery address? Your email address? Suspend delivery? You can manage your account online by clicking here. Are you a subscriber looking for our digital edition? If so, click here. That digital edition can also be viewed by subscribers on iPads, iPhones, Kindle Fires, Android tablets and smartphones. Log in on the device to the digital edition and the technology should take you to the correct format.