Vladimir Putin and Evo Morales met on Tuesday. Photograph: Maxim Shemetov/Reuters Bolivia threw a possible lifeline to the surveillance whistleblower Edward Snowden on Tuesday, telling Russian television it would consider granting him political asylum to escape from what it called the espionage network of the US "empire". As other options began to fade for Snowden, trapped in the transit zone of a Moscow airport, Bolivian president Evo Morales said his country was keen to "shield the denounced". Snowden's father, meanwhile, stepped up the rhetoric in favour of his son's actions on Tuesday, publishing an open letter that compared him to colonial independence fighter Paul Revere. The letter was signed by Lon Snowden and his lawyer, Bruce Fein, who also reported receiving a phone call from WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange. Fein told the Associated Press that Assange, in the phone call on Saturday, delivered what he said was a message from Snowden to his father, asking him to keep quiet. Speaking in Moscow, Morales said Bolivia had not received a formal application for asylum from Snowden yet, but hinted it would consider any request favourably. "If there were a request, of course we would be willing to debate and consider the idea," Morales told RT Actualidad, the Spanish-language service of Russian broadcaster RT. "I know that the empires have an espionage network and are against the so-called developing countries. And in particular, against those which are rich in natural resources," he added. His comments were echoed by favourable noises from the Venezuelan government, another possible exit route for the former NSA contractor. President Nicolas Maduro said Caracas was also ready to consider Snowden's asylum should he ask for it. Maduro said Snowden should be given a "humanitarian medal" for revealing details of NSA surveillance programmes on US and foreign citizens. "He did not kill anyone and did not plant a bomb," Maduro told Russia's Interfax news agency. "What he did was tell a great truth in an effort to prevent wars. He deserves protection under international and humanitarian law." "Who must protect Snowden? This is the question. This young man of 29 was brave enough to say that we need to protect the world from the American imperial elite, so who should protect him?" Maduro added in response to a question from journalists covering a ceremony to rename a Moscow street after Hugo Chávez. "All of mankind, people all over the world must protect him." Maduro and Morales are in Moscow to take part in a summit of gas exporting countries. In Washington, the US State Department said it was "hopeful" Snowden would be returned to the US to face charges of espionage and theft after a string of other countries said they would be not accept Snowden's petition for asylum. State Department spokeswoman Jen Psaki also rejected claims made by Snowden on Monday the US had bullied other potential hosts such as Ecuador into withdrawing their offer of asylum. "I am not sure what the basis for those claims are," she said. The US insists it has simply impressed upon possible host countries the seriousness of the crimes that Snowden has been charged with. Psaki also defended a decision to suspend his passport, an act which has left Snowden unable to the leave the airport transit zone and which he described as "using national identity as a weapon". The State Department says such as response is normal when a US citizen attempts to flee arrest in this way. In the open letter, Lon Snowden wrote in glowing terms about his son. "You have forced onto the national agenda the question of whether the American people prefer the right to be left alone from government snooping absent probable cause to believe crime is afoot to vassalage," he wrote. "You are a modern day Paul Revere: summoning the American people to confront the growing danger of tyranny and one branch government." In his public statements, Lon Snowden expressed concern about the role of WikiLeaks in his son's affairs. Fein told the AP that he was working to establish a direct link between father and son that did not require WikiLeaks as an intermediary.