Link to video: Bolivia outraged after President Evo Morales' plane diverted Amid a growing diplomatic storm, the Bolivian president, Evo Morales, has been allowed to fly out of Vienna, but only after a 12-hour interruption during which his plane was stopped and searched for the whistleblower Edward Snowden. South American leaders have reacted with fury to the forced diversion of the plane, which was on its way back from Moscow where Morales had been attending talks on energy issues. Bolivian officials accused France, Portugal, Spain and Italy of withdrawing permission for the plane to pass through their airspace, prompting the unscheduled stop in Vienna. Bolivia's ambassador to the UN, Sacha Llorenti, said Austria's decision to search the aircraft was an act of aggression and a violation of international law, according to Reuters. Austria's deputy chancellor, Michael Spindelegger, claimed that Morales "agreed to a voluntary inspection". Officials in Austria and Bolivia said Snowden was not on the plane. The Bolivian foreign minister, David Choquehuanca, said: "We don't know who invented this lie. We want to denounce to the international community this injustice with the plane of Evo Morales." In a midnight press conference, Bolivia's vice-president, Álvaro García Linera, described Morales as being "kidnapped by imperialism" in Europe. "The ambassador for Spain in Austria has just informed us that there is no authorisation to fly over Spanish territory and that at 9am Wednesday they would be in contact with us again," the Bolivian defence minister, Ruben Saavedra, said. The Spanish government had made "revision of the presidential plane" a condition of granting it passage, he added. Several South American countries have condemned the treatment of Morales. The foreign minister of Ecuador, Ricardo Patiño Aroca, said his country would stand with Bolivia. "We will not allow this affront against a Latin American leader," he tweeted. Peru has called for an emergency meeting on Wednesday of the Union of South American Nations. "Tomorrow is going to be a long and difficult day," tweeted the president of Argentina, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, adding that Morales had been treated with "impunity". Venezuela has also reacted with fury, and the Uruguayan president, José Mujica, is also said to be indignant. Choquehuanca earlier told reporters that Portugal and France had abruptly cancelled air permits. "They say it was due to technical issues, but after getting explanations from some authorities we found that there appeared to be some unfounded suspicions that Mr Snowden was on the plane." Choquehuanca said in a statement that after France and Portugal cancelled authorisation for the flight, Spain's government allowed the plane to be refuelled in its territory. From there the plane flew on to Vienna. He said the decision by France and Portugal "put at risk the life of the president". Saavedra, who was on the flight, said: "This is a hostile act by the United States state department which has used various European governments." Later he said France and Portugal had reconsidered and had agreed to allow Morales' plane to overfly, but that Italy and Spain were still refusing. "Two countries have changed their positions, first France and now Portugal," Saavedra said. "We will patiently seek to resolve the negative position taken by Italy and Spain, according to international norms." Officials at the White House were not immediately able to comment on whether it had put pressure on European allies to refuse to allow the plane to enter their airspace. Officials at Portugal's foreign ministry and National Civil Aviation Authority could not be reached for comment. French government officials reached overnight said they could not confirm whether Morales' plane was denied permission to fly over France. The precautions may have been prompted by a desire among governments in Paris and Lisbon to avoid entanglement in the affair, especially with public opinion in Europe running strongly against revelations of US spying. Morales had earlier used a television interview in Moscow to hint strongly that Bolivia would look favourably on an asylum request from Snowden. As other options began to fade for the US whistleblower, trapped in the transit zone of a Moscow airport, Morales said his country was keen to "shield the denounced". Speaking in Moscow, Morales said Bolivia had not received a formal application for asylum from Snowden yet, but hinted any request would be considered favourably. "If there were a request, of course we would be willing to debate and consider the idea," Morales told RT Actualidad, the Spanish-language service of the Russian broadcaster RT. "I know that the empires have an espionage network and are against the so-called developing countries. And in particular, against those which are rich in natural resources," he added. His comments were echoed by favourable noises from Venezuela, another possible exit route for the former NSA contractor. The country's president, Nicolás Maduro, said Caracas was also ready to consider asylum for Snowden, should he ask for it. Maduro said Snowden should be given a "humanitarian medal" for revealing details of NSA surveillance programmes on US and foreign citizens. "He did not kill anyone and did not plant a bomb," Maduro told Russia's Interfax news agency. "What he did was tell a great truth in an effort to prevent wars. He deserves protection under international and humanitarian law." Snowden's father, meanwhile, stepped up the rhetoric in favour of his son's actions, publishing an open letter that compared him to the colonial independence fighter Paul Revere. The letter was signed by Lon Snowden and his lawyer, Bruce Fein, who also reported receiving a phone call from WikiLeaks' founder, Julian Assange. Fein told the Associated Press that Assange, in the phone call on Saturday, delivered what he said was a message from Snowden to his father, asking him to keep quiet. In the open letter, Lon Snowden wrote in glowing terms about his son. "You have forced on to the national agenda the question of whether the American people prefer the right to be left alone from government snooping absent probable cause to believe crime is afoot to vassalage," he wrote. "You are a modern day Paul Revere: summoning the American people to confront the growing danger of tyranny and one branch government." In Washington, the US state department said it was "hopeful" Snowden would be returned to the US to face charges of espionage and theft after a string of other countries said they would not accept his petition for asylum. Speaking before the developments in Vienna, a state department spokeswoman, Jen Psaki, rejected claims made by Snowden on Monday that the US had bullied other potential hosts, such as Ecuador, into withdrawing their offer of asylum. "I am not sure what the basis for those claims are," she said. The US insists it has simply impressed upon possible host countries the seriousness of the crimes that Snowden has been charged with. Psaki also defended a decision to suspend Snowden's passport, an act which has left him unable to the leave the airport transit zone and which he has described as "using national identity as a weapon". The state department says such a response is normal when a US citizen attempts to flee arrest in this way.