7.04pm BST • A jet carrying the Bolivian president is on its way home after being forced to land at Vienna airport because of the refusal of some European countries to let it pass through their airspace. Eva Morales was returning from a visit to Moscow. He called it "an excuse to scare, intimidate and punish me".  • Morales was stranded at the airport for 14 hours amid suspicions that the NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden was on board his plane. Both the Bolivian and Austrian authorities insisted Snowden was not on the plane, although the extent to which the Austrian police officers searched the jet was unclear. • An Austrian official told AP that Morales's aircraft asked controllers at Vienna airport to land because there was "no clear indication" that the plane had enough fuel to continue on its journey. This tallies with audio posted online purporting to be of a conversation between the jet pilot and the control room at the airport.  • The Austrian government said it was given permission by Morales to search the plane but Bolivia's vice-president Alvaro Garcia denied this, saying the jet was entitled to immunity. He said Morales had been "kidnapped by imperialism", while the Bolivian foreign minister, David Choquehuanca, accused France and Portugal of putting the president's life at risk by cancelling authorisation for the plane. • Bolivia's UN ambassador has said that the country will file a formal complaint with the United Nations over the "kidnapping" of Morales. • A number of South American leaders voiced outrage at the incident, including the Argentinian president Cristina Kirchner and Rafael Correa, the president of Ecuador. • Latin American presidents plan an emergency meeting today to discuss the diversion of the plane. The time of the meeting of Unasur (the Union of South American Nations) has not been revealed. • Ecuador's foreign minister Ricardo Patino says Ecuador has found a hidden microphone inside its London embassy, where WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange is living, and it will disclose today who controls the device. Patino described it as "another instance of a loss of ethics at the international level in relations between governments".