Link to video: Bolivian president Evo Morales returns home after plane diversion row The Bolivian president, Evo Morales, has called the rerouting of his plane over suspicions that the NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden was aboard a provocation to Latin America and urged European countries to "free themselves" from the United States. His presidential plane arrived home in Bolivia's capital late on Wednesday night following an unplanned 14-hour stop in Vienna. His government said France, Spain and Portugal all refused to let it through their airspace, forcing it to land in Austria. He had been flying home from a summit in Russia. Bolivian government officials have repeatedly said they believe that Washington was behind the incident. "It is an open provocation to the continent, not only to the president; they use the agent of North American imperialism to scare us and intimidate us," Morales told about 100 supporters gathered at the airport in La Paz to greet him. Morales had suggested while in Russia that he would be willing to consider giving Snowden asylum in Bolivia. "I regret [saying] this, but I want to say that some European countries should free themselves from North American imperialism," he said. Ecuador's foreign minister, Ricardo Patiño, said the presidents of half a dozen Latin American countries would attend a meeting in Cochabamba, Bolivia, on Thursday to discuss the matter. Bolivia said earlier it would also summon the French and Italian ambassadors and the Portuguese consul to demand explanations. It is still unclear whether European countries did block the plane and, if so, why. French, Spanish and Portuguese officials have all said the plane was allowed to cross their territory. The US has declined to comment on whether it was involved in any decision to close European airspace, saying only that "US officials have been in touch with a broad range of countries over the course of the last 10 days" about the Snowden case. "The message has been communicated both publicly and privately," state department spokeswoman Jen Psaki said on Wednesday. "He should be returned to the United States." Snowden is still believed to be stuck in a Moscow airport transit area, seeking asylum from one of more than a dozen countries. • A subheading and the text was amended on 5 July 2013. As the result of a misreading of the edited agency story about President Morales's speech, a subheading stated that the president regretted offering Snowden asylum. He did not.