SPOILER ALERT: This blog is for viewers watching The Americans at British and Australian broadcast pace. Do not read on if you haven't watched episode six – and please do not post spoilers if you've seen further in the series. Vicky Frost's episode five blog Trust Me Hello and welcome to this evening's blog, in which we discuss how the very experienced Elisabeth, Phillip, and Vasili were all taken in by the oldest tricks in the spy handbook as the KGB hunted its mole: the rezident the victim of a beautifully orchestrated honey trap; the Jennings an interrogation by their own side. But while the Americans might have some large and puzzling plotholes, it is very big on that kind of strong storytelling in which events and themes are mirrored and balanced across various characters and organisations, neatly contrasted for maximum effect. And so tonight we came to the issue of trust: between Nina and Beeman; Philip and Elizabeth; the Jennings and the KGB; Vasili and Nina; Paige, Henry and strange adults. The on-screen results were perhaps not so even. I clocked pretty quickly that the Jennings were being overhauled by their own side – there were too many giveaways in the warehouse to think anything else, I'd have thought – and I don't believe that Philip and Elizabeth, aware of the mole and KGB methods, wouldn't have arrived at that realisation themselves. Although admittedly, the moment your worst fears come true is not the ideal time to be questioning the reality of events. There was lots of stuff that didn't quite add up: the idea that the KGB, so happy to use the kids emotionally, and aware that the Jennings might well return home, wouldn't have made provision to pick up the children and provide a cover story seemed particularly unlikely. (More on that below). Surely disappearing your agents for hours and then returning them bruised and battered under cover of a mystery car crash is not the most unobtrusive thing to do. Was the house still wrecked when the kids got home? Presumably the muscle had to bundle Elisabeth out of the house – opposite the FBI officer – without anyone noticing. Still, we got our answer over Philip's loyalty. In a great comment post last week, @JosephKern highlighted that Elisabeth was less worried about Stan suspecting Philip of being a KGB agent, as I'd supposed, than she was of him getting too close and defecting. Quite right. Hence matters coming to a head post interrogation when Philip's will had seemingly been tested rather more than his wife's, despite her protestations otherwise. His reply to her accusation: you loved it here too much – "I fit in here. Like I'm meant to" – was nicely opaque, suggesting both a sense of duty and an ackowledgement of the benefits of American life. So far the KGB search for a mole amid its own ranks has resulted in its officer being brutally assaulted by her own agent, Elisabeth and Philip's marriage going backwards, the mistrust between them growing, and the perfectly loyal Vasili being sent back to Russia and presumably death. Meanwhile the mole remains. Good job! It was, in fact, a good job from Beeman. I really enjoyed watching the net tighten around Vasili in a piece of classic spywork – the diamonds and camera planted; the badly coded, obvious messages left while Nina was keeping the rezident from coming to the phone. Like clockwork. And in addition to now having a mole the KGB are once again no longer aware of, Stan also has a double agent who trusts in both his motives and abilities. Talk about clutching victory from the jaws of defeat … It's rare for one side to come out of an episode so much further ahead than the other – usually The Americans is careful to balance events so that they effectively cancel each other out. Here, however, the Americans begin to look like the good guys. Let's hope that's not a continuing trend. A thought about the slightly odd Paige and Henry storyline, which to me felt rather tacked onto the rest of the episode. Obviously kids shouldn't hitchhike but it felt too convenient that the minute the pair were on their own, they met a knife-wielding creep. You might argue that he was sent by Moscow to pick the kids up and dispose of them as necessary. But that feels too far-fetched: how did they know the kids would hitchhike? Why would they send someone so obviously creepy? How was he going to keep them there for the many hours necessary? I don't buy it. Thoughts and observations • It is, of course, a particularly interesting week to be watching a drama about Cold War spying given recent developments concerning Edward Snowden, the US and Russia • We're back to the silent noisy fighting – the Jennings have neighbours who might take an interest in loud crash bang wallops. • More top brawling from Elizabeth. Although I do rather get the message now that her stature is not relevant to her defence/ injury skills. • Her reaction to her loyalty being doubted was interesting – and fierce. As Philip points out: it clearly hurt above all else. • Clearly, Henry takes after his mum – I predict him starting to become suspicious of his parents' activities pretty soon. • Sometimes the Americans' symbolism can get a bit heavy handed: the business with the heart-shaped necklace. A bit too much eh? • I did like that Vasili realised Nina was responsible for his downfall but was unable to either prove his innocence or prevent her inflicting further damage. • More of that neat mirroring: as the Jennings' relationship takes a turn for the worse, the Beemans' seems to be improving. Line of the week Gregory's back: “When the lady calls, I oblige.”