Yang Jiechi shakes hands with William Burns at the closing session of the talks in Washington. Photograph: Michael Reynolds/EPA The US has said it is disappointed with China over its refusal to extradite the NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden and instead allow him to leave Hong Kong. William Burns, the deputy secretary of state, said: "China's handling of this case was not consistent with … the new type of relationship that we both seek to build." He said the US was "disappointed with how the authorities in Beijing and Hong Kong handled the Snowden case". The remarks came after two days of high-level talks on security and economy and the announcement of plans to negotiate a bilateral investment treaty and more co-operation on combating climate change. Barack Obama also expressed disappointment about the Snowden case when he met the two leaders of the Chinese delegation in the Oval Office on Thursday, a White House statement said. The state councillor Yang Jiechi retorted that the handling of the Snowden case by authorities in semi-autonomous Hong Kong was "beyond reproach". Yang also rejected US criticism of China's rights record in the ethnic minority areas of Tibet and Xinjiang, saying people there were "enjoying happier lives and they enjoy unprecedented freedom and human rights". He added: "We hope the US will improve its own human rights situation." About 120 Tibetans have set themselves on fire since 2011 to protest against Chinese policies in Tibet and call for the return of the Dalai Lama, their exiled spiritual leader. In the far western region of Xinjiang, minority Muslims are agitating against Beijing, and clashes in recent months have killed at least 56 people. The stark differences of opinion on those issues did not prevent kind words on both sides too. The US treasury secretary, Jacob Lew, hailed the "personal approach" of China's new generation of leaders under Xi Jinping, who ascended to the presidency in March in a once-in-a-decade power transition. China's vice-premier, Wang Yang, whom US officials say has demonstrated a keen sense of humour in this week's talks, joked that Lew was smarter than he was and they had become good friends. Obama welcomed China's commitment to open its economy to US investment in the bilateral investment treaty, a pact that Washington has been urging Beijing to negotiate in earnest for years. The Chinese also agreed with him on the importance of co-operating to get North Korea to abandon its pursuit of nuclear weapons. But Obama said the US would continue to speak out in support of international norms such as the protection of universal human rights, the White House statement said.