England plunged the bucket deep into the well of their spirit to extricate themselves from their perilous position after Ashton Agar's second-day mugging, to one where, by the close of the third day, they will have nursed more than a glimmer of being able to win this tight, utterly compelling match and would indeed be favourites. First came Alastair Cook and Kevin Pietersen, one in character, the other superbly restrained, making 50 and 64 respectively. And after both had gone within two overs of one another in mid-morning, Cook giving Agar a first Test wicket to go with his runs, there came Ian Bell, recipient all too often of unwarranted criticism but who poured heart and soul into one of his finest innings for England, perhaps the finest, to make an unbeaten 95 in five and a half hours. Never again should his competitiveness or appetite for the fray be questioned. He worked his socks off for this innings, played when failure could lead to defeat, and he delivered. He has now passed 6,000 Test runs, the 14th England batsman to do so, and five more would deliver him an 18th Test hundred. He required support, and it came from Jonny Bairstow, whose 15 runs belie his contribution over an hour and a half, then Matt Prior, who attacked the new ball with gusto to make 31 before over-gustoing, and finally Stuart Broad, pummelled in the first innings but who knuckled down and played elegantly for 47 not out. He largely kept his head, even when tied down and frustrated by overs of parsimony from Shane Watson, and he helped add a gold-dust unbeaten 108 for the seventh wicket, although not without later incident which will infuriate Australians every bit as much as the DRS controversy of the previous day. Every run eked out was cheered to the rafters by the England supporters, each of the wickets, less of a cascade than on the first two days, by the blocks of green-and-gold garbed Australians. This was mesmerising, tooth and claw Ashes cricket. The situation now is simple: when the teams resume on the fourth morning, England, on 326 for six, hold a lead of 261, with the potential to add further, that has transformed them from potential losers to favourites to win. Already, chasing will represent a massive task for Australia. Historical comparisons with previous fourth innings at Trent Bridge, win, lose or draw, are rendered redundant by this pitch, which is uncharacteristically tinder dry as it has been all match, and has shown the first signs of the erratic bounce that might be expected on such surfaces when the cracks begin to open. There has been a little turn too, but mostly out of the rough of which more has been created by the right-arm pacemen for Graeme Swann to utilise against Australia's plethora of left-handers than has been there for Agar against England's largely right-handed lineup. The pitch has slowed right down, though, so that any ideas of banging the ball in are surely redundant. If England are to win it will be done with reverse swing and spin. There will be concerns, though. Jimmy Anderson is a wonderful exponent of reverse and we know Swann's capabilities. But Anderson cannot bowl all the way through and no one yet knows the degree of bowling fitness of Broad, who did not bowl until quite late on in Agar's innings on the second day. This leaves Steve Finn, whose bowling, while never lacking industry, has been so generous and short of confidence in this game that when he has been bowling Edward Snowden could have sought asylum on a good Trent Bridge length and come to no harm. He will be needed though, for if there is to be increasingly low bounce it is the tall fast bowlers who are best equipped to exploit it so that the variations are most exaggerated: quick and straight from him and let that be the end of the matter. The decision by Michael Clarke to take the second new ball was a pivotal moment in the day and perhaps may prove to be so in the context of match and series. England had lost Bairstow to the final ball before it was due after a stand of 43 with Bell. The flow of runs had dried up – not crucial at that stage – against the soft ball and, after two further overs, Clarke decided that he needed the new one, for the extra bounce, to get more pace at the batsmen and to get some better reverse. It can cut both ways for the ball comes on to the bat better and run scoring becomes easier. Prior began to cut and carve as he does and in that was the genesis of the England resurgence. Only Prior's own counterattacking instinct got the better of him in the end as he pulled to midwicket a speculative bouncer from Peter Siddle, who would hammer the ball in on plasticine if necessary. But Prior had made 31 at a run a ball, injecting momentum in a stand of 44. Given the manner in which the first innings collapsed, England were still in a dubious position though, with a lead of 153, sufficient to create some disquiet but probably not to win. In the first innings Broad had been bombarded, and hurt, but the pitch was too sluggish now. He began to play fluently and gradually the partnership blossomed. There were ructions, however. When Broad had 37 he appeared to feather a delivery from Agar to slip via the gloves of Brad Haddin. Broad stood his ground and Aleem Dar ruled not out. There was no recourse for the Australians, who had wasted their final DRS review on a speculative lbw appeal against Bairstow much earlier. It will be called cheating, but the reality is that players, including Australians unless your name is Gilchrist, with few exceptions do not walk when they edge to the keeper (which, no matter where the ball ended up, is what he did). If they have a beef it should be with Aleem Dar who gave it not out.