5.29pm BST Here’s a summary of today’s events: • Thousands more people than would have been expected died at 14 hospital trusts being investigated for high mortality rates, Jeremy Hunt told parliament. But the report by NHS England medical director Sir Bruce Keogh cast serious doubt on the two hospital mortality indicators used to select the 14 and justify the investigation – and on this specific claim by Hunt. It says: "However tempting it may be, it is clinically meaningless and academically reckless to use such statistical measures to quantify actual numbers of avoidable deaths." The health secretary said 11 of the trusts would be put into “special measures” for “fundamental breaches of care” and external experts would be sent in to improve patient care. Keogh's review found that none of the hospitals investigated was providing "consistently high quality care to patients". • As expected, Hunt attacked the last Labour government for many of the failings. But amid rowdy scenes in the Commons, Andy Burnham, his Labour shadow who was health secretary from 2009 to 2010, hit back, saying the report covered 2011-12 and so the failings detailed happened on the current government’s watch. • Danny Alexander, the chief secretary to the Treasury, called for the number of Trident submarines to be cut and continuous 24-hour patrols to be ended. But the prime minister’s spokesman said David Cameron continued to back a continuous deterrent. Labour said the same. • Chief Constable Mick Creedon has told the Commons home affairs select committee his investigation into the Guardian’s revelations about undercover police officers has uncovered no evidence of officers smearing the family of murdered black teenager Stephen Lawrence. Last month a police officer who spent four years living undercover in protest groups revealed how he participated in an operation to spy on and attempt to "smear" the Lawrence family. Creedon said the identities of 42 dead children had been used by undercover officers. • Theresa May, the home secretary, told the home affairs committee that if Mark Ellison, who is reviewing claims of police corruption in the original Stephen Lawrence investigations, says a public inquiry into claims undercover police tried to smear the Lawrence family is needed, she will support such an inquiry. • Former Tory deputy chairman Lord Ashcroft published polling showing that many of the supposedly populist proposals made by Tory backbenchers in their “alternative Queen’s speech” – such as holding a Margaret Thatcher Day – were in fact unpopular or of little interest. • William Hague, the foreign secretary, announced £656,800 of non-lethal assistance for "moderate" Syrian rebels to guard against chemical weapons attack. • Inflation in the UK has risen to its highest level for more than a year, 2.9% on the headline rate, outstripping average UK pay growth, which is running at 1.3%. • YouGov and ICM have produced very different polling figures. ICM’s, for the Guardian, shows Labour and the Tories neck and neck at 36%. YouGov’s shows a nine-point lead for Labour. That's it from me. Andrew Sparrow will be back tomorrow. Thanks for all the comments.