Grand ambitions … Johanna Söderburg of First Aid Kit in concert at Somerset House in London. Photograph: Helen Boast/Music Pics/Rex Features Johanna Söderberg probably never thought she'd find herself here. If someone had told the First Aid Kit vocalist five years ago that she would one day stand on a huge raised stage in a packed neoclassical courtyard, thrashing her head as though to heavy metal while pummelling her keyboard with two flat hands and a bare foot, she likely would have blushed from the roots of her diffident hair to the tips of her demure toes. Yet this raucous abandonment is just one of many signs of her and her younger sister Klara's growing confidence. The duo made their name in 2008 with a homespun cover of Fleet Foxes' Tiger Mountain Peasant Song; but at Somerset House they set their allegiances much higher, staking out their place alongside Bob Dylan (a plodding take on One More Cup of Coffee), Paul Simon (a honeyed America) and Patti Smith (an almost sinister, keening run through a tribute to Edward Snowden that Patti has lately taken to singing). Is it hubris? A little, noticeably when their own songs fail to rise to the challenge of their influences. This Old Routine elicits sighs of pleasure from the crowd, but its world-weary tales of relationships gone stale feel studied rather than lived. The Lion's Roar moves from a country strum to another explosion of rock noise without the sisters quite getting the best of either sound. In title and approach, it's more suggestive of Mumford and Sons than anyone else. But in softer moments, First Aid Kit exude a grace that more than justifies their ambitions. They have a wonderful knack of letting their voices swoop together then dive, like a hawk suddenly snatching up prey; each discord makes you reel. The stillness of Ghost Town is particularly touching, Klara's guitar ringing out between the chimes of the clock, the sisters sounding so young, yet old as time. • Did you catch this gig – or any other recently? Tell us about it using #GdnGig Tweet #GdnGig