2.09pm BST • David Cameron has welcomed figures showing that the number of people claiming unemployment benefit dropped by 21,200 in June, the fastest rate of decline in three years. "The unemployment figures today are welcome," he said at PMQs. "They see a very large fall in the claimant count today - 20,000 in the last month and encouraging signs in terms of employment growth." But Liam Byrne, the shadow work and pensions secretary, said that the same figures showed that pay was plummeting. Any shred of progress on jobs is welcome but today's figures show that economic recovery is so weak that pay is plummeting. Job creation is now so sluggish that pay-packets are getting hammered in the longest squeeze since the 1870s. Those in work are working harder and earning less - £1,350 a year less than they were in 2010 - in fact workers are earning today the same as they made in 2000. We are now creating jobs ten times more slowly than this time last year and there are more part-timers looking for full time work than ever before. • Ed Miliband has accused Cameron of presiding over a "disgraceful" conflict of interest. Speaking at PMQs, he challenged Cameron to deny that he had discussed cigarette packaging with Lynton Crosby, the Conservative election strategist whose lobbying company represents the tobacco industry. Miliband suggested Crosby was responsible for the government's decision to ditch its plans to ban cigarettes from being sold in branded packets. This is what he said when Cameron refused to deny having had a conversation with Crosby about this issue. The whole of the country will have heard those same weasel words that you are sticking to. You can't deny that he had a conversation with Lynton Crosby about this issue. Even by the standards of this Prime Minister, this is a disgraceful episode. [Tory MP Sarah Wollaston] described it as a 'day of shame for this government'. You are the Prime Minister for Benson and Hedgefunds and you know it. Can't you see that there is a devastating conflict of interest between having your key adviser raking it in from big tobacco and then advising you not to go ahead with plain packaging? But Cameron said the real "lobbying scandal" was on the Labour side. The trade unions buy his policies, buy his candidates, they even bought and paid for his leadership. This government is doing something that they never did for 13 years and that is publishing a lobbying bill. Let us remember why we need a lobbying bill: we had former Labour ministers who described themselves as cabs for hire, we had cabinet ministers giving passports for favours, we had a prime minister questioned by the police under cash for honours. They are in no position to lecture anyone on standards in public life. Labour later said it was writing to Downing Street to demand an inquiry into whether Cameron has breached the ministers' code of conduct (perhaps forgetting that Labour's Jon Trickett apparently wrote such a letter at the end of last week). The code states that ministers "must ensure that no conflict arises, or could reasonably be perceived to arise, between their public duties and their private interests, financial or otherwise". • Cameron has defended his decision to take a major donor to the Conservative party with him on a trade trip to Kazakhstan. During PMQs Labour's Helen Goodman asked: You have certainly been helping Jersey registered companies with their exports. Perhaps you could tell us whether the reason you took Petrofac's Ayman Asfari with you to Kazakhstan was because he had donated £300,000 to the Tory Party? Cameron replied: I will tell you very directly why I took Ayman Asfari to Kazakhstan. Petrofac is a company that employs tens of thousands of people in this country, it is investing billions into the North Sea, it is a major British energy company and I am proud of the fact we fly the flag for British energy companies. So when I finish taking them to Kazakhstan, I'll be taking them to India, I'll be taking them to China, I'll be taking them to Malaysia. We are not embarrassed about business, industry, enterprise and jobs on this side. We want more of them. • Nick Clegg has denied that the government is seeking to turn schools into "exam sausage factories" after he announced plans to toughen tests for primary school pupils. As Nicholas Watt reports, as the leader of the National Union of Teachers warned that the changes would doom many pupils to failure, the deputy prime minister said the government wanted to give children the best start to their secondary school education. There is more detail in the DfE news release. • Parliament's intelligence and security committee has called for a review of the UK legal framework governing electronic surveillance and questioned whether it is adequate to police the technical capabilities of the intelligence agencies in the internet age. • Jeremy Browne, the Home Office minister, has confirmed that the government has shelved plans for a minimum unit price for alcohol, but will ban the sale of alcoholic drinks priced below the level of duty and VAT.  As the Press Association reports, a consultation document last year floated a base price of 45p per unit in England and Wales, but Browne said there was not enough "concrete evidence" that the move would reduce the level of problem drinking without hitting people who drink responsibly. (I've been listening to Browne while I've been writing this, and he put in an impressive performance. He's on the liberal wing of his party, rather than the social democrat wing, and he seems very comfortable with the policy. He genuinely believes the state should be wary of stopping people buying cheap alcohol.) • BBC Trust chairman Lord Patten and the corporation's director of human resources, Lucy Adams, have been recalled to give evidence to MPs about executive payoffs – on the same day as former director general Mark Thompson. As John Plunkett reports, a rift has opened up between Patten and Thompson, now the chief executive of the New York Times Company, over the controversial payouts to former senior management, in particular the £949,000 paid out to former deputy director general Mark Byford. Now Patten and Thompson will be appearing before the Commons public accounts select committee on the same day, with both men due to give evidence to MPs on 9 September. • A report by the police watchdog has found Scotland Yard is failing in the way it handles complaints of racism and discrimination against officers, a decade after the force vowed to stamp out prejudice in the ranks. As Vikram Dodd reports, the report by the Independent Police Complaints Commission (IPCC) led the Met to admit it was letting down the public in the way it handled racism complaints. The report followed allegations of police racism, some of which were revealed by the Guardian. • Bank of England policymakers swung behind the new governor, Mark Carney, and voted unanimously against extending quantitative easing at this month's monetary policy committee meeting, the bank has revealed. • Heathrow airport has unveiled three different proposals for a third runway, putting tens of thousands of homes either under new flight paths or at risk of demolition. • Margaret Hodge, the chair of the Commons public accounts committee, has criticised the Treasury for failing to include the part-nationalised banks and Network Rail in the government's accounts. As the Press Association reports, Hodge said she could see no justification for excluding them from the Whole of Government Accounts, published today. She described the £1 trillion liability for public sector pensions disclosed in the accounts as "shocking" and said she was disappointed to see the cost of setting claims for clinical negligence in the NHS rising to £19.4bn. Auditor general Amyas Morse said the accounts suggest that the government's drive to rein in spending is having an impact, with an underlying reduction of £11 billion in the UK's accounting deficit for 2011/12. Updated at 4.30pm BST