7.59pm ET The House today nearly passed the strongest measure congress has seen since whistleblower Edward Snowden leaked details of some of the NSA's top secret surveillance programs. Following a spirited and occasionally acrimonious debate, which included a thinly veiled swipe at bill co-author congressman Justin Amash for only caring about his Facebook "likes," the House narrowly defeated the amendment to limit the NSA's bulk phone record collection powers, 205-217.  The focus on the amendment to the House's defense appropriations package intensified last evening when the White House issued a rare statement opposing it. "This blunt approach is not the product of an informed, open, or deliberative process," the White House's statement read. While the amendment, co-authored by Amash, a relatively junior Republican, and Conyers, a veteran liberal Democrat, failed to get the votes, civil libertarians are considering those 205 "yes" votes a major step in the right direction. The roll call is here. A majority of Republicans voted against it, 94-134, while a majority of Democrats voted for it, 111-83. Spencer Ackerman has more details in The Guardian's full story: Despite a concerted lobbying effort by the White House and senior intelligence figures, the attempt to rein in the NSA failed by only 12 votes. The final vote was 205 in favor and 217 against, exposing deep restiveness in Congress over the wisdom and constitutionality of the bulk surveillance on Americans less than two months after the Guardian exposed it thanks to leaks from whistleblower Edward Snowden. A shift of seven votes would have changed the outcome. Civil libertarians disappointed by the vote promised not to relent in opposing what they consider an unnecessary and unconstitutional violation of Americans' privacy. The principal author of the effort, Michigan Republican Justin Amash, said he introduced his amendment to the annual Defense Department appropriations bill to "defend the fourth amendment, to defend the privacy of each and every American."