12.47pm ET Guardian Washington correspondent Paul Lewis reports that Democratic party leaders, the White House and senior intelligence officials whipped as hard they could all week to get members from voting for the Amash amendment – but for most Democrats, pressure from constituents to reign in the NSA was stronger:  "I just interviewed Congresswoman Barbara Lee, one of the 111 Democrats who voted for the amendment (83 voted against)," Paul writes. "She said the 'stage was now set' for more action on this front in Congress": I can tell you why I voted for it - and most Democrats have the same sentiment. First of all we have to a balance between civil liberties and national security, and I believe this was a very carefully crafted and balanced amendment. Right now, we must reign in the NSA...This was a great bipartisan vote, and in Congress, which is very polarised, and there are very few times when Democrats and Republicans vote together. Of course, the NSA and the administration did not want to see this amendment going forward. But for myself, it really did provide that balance between privacy and security. Paul continues: "Rep. Lee told me that the vote was just the start of what would be further attempts to address NSA surveillance powers in lights of Snowden's leaks. 'It was a great beginning - a first step,' she said. 'I think this has set the stage for us to come back with something.' But she was perhaps most interesting when asked why so many House members came out in favour of the amendment: in her view, public pressure among their constituents back home. "Lee said the issue was a 'priority' among voters in her district in California and elsewhere too": It is a priority issue out there throughout the country. The polls may not say it, but if you talk to most people, they will tell you that domestic spying needs to be reined in. You can break that down and hear it when you talk to people. In the country, people want a balance. They don't want their privacy eroded. They don't want the fundamentals of democracy to be tampered with in this way. They recognise we have to protect the country and the president is the commander in chief and he has to be responsible for national security issues. But is has gone overboard now. In a democracy, it is the power of the people, and people really are worried about this slippery slope we are on. Paul concludes: "There is of course an opposing view among Democrats. Congresswoman Jan Schakowsky, among the minority of House Democrats to vote against the amendment, said in a statement to the Guardian that she had previously been 'outspoken in my concerns for protecting civil liberties and the privacy of Americans'. But she added that she believed there needed to be a more extensive debate. "As a member of the Intelligence Committee, I am actively engaged in a process to balance the goals of protecting our national security and safeguarding those civil liberties," she said. "The Amash amendment would hastily end the NSA program without the transparency and full Congressional debate needed to consider all alternatives and to make fully informed decisions.”  – Paul Lewis (@PaulLewis) Updated at 12.49pm ET