As recently as 1984, Silicon Valley was still a specialised manufacturing industry. Photograph: Guardian A quick burst of 11 links for you to chew over, as picked by the Technology team Not even Silicon Valley escapes history >> The Atlantic The Valley was as important a manufacturing center as Detroit or Pittsburgh were. This was the place making the foundational technology of the era, and it brought prosperity to the region. Between 1964 and 1984, Santa Clara County added 203,000 manufacturing jobs, according to a report by the Association of Bay Area Governments; 85 percent of them were in high-tech. Venture firm Greylock Partners outshines Silicon Valley rivals >> Businessweek Founded in Cambridge, Mass., Greylock opened its first Valley office in 1999, after missing the first dot-com boom, and it did little in its early years on the West Coast to distinguish itself. Yet in the past five years, as most venture firms have performed poorly, Greylock's bets have yielded some of the best results in VC history. It invested early in LinkedIn, Facebook (FB), Pandora Media (P), business-management software company Workday, and firewall maker Palo Alto Networks (PANW). Partners, including David Sze and LinkedIn co-founder Reid Hoffman, are now spoken of in the same breath as legendary investors John Doerr of Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers and Michael Moritz of Sequoia Capital. Snapchat and the beauty of ephemeral photography >> TechCrunch Traditionally photography is about preserving a moment in time; you take a picture literally because it'll last longer. The entire art is built around a quest for permanence, and archival desires. But with Snapchat, you're casting off those things you photograph almost as soon as you take the picture - in many cases it's less permanent than just continuing to look at something. For an avid hobbyist photographer, it's somewhat counterintuitive, but also very liberating. PRISM revelations result in lost business for US cloud companies >> Ars Technica The revelations about the National Security Agency's (NSA) broad monitoring of traffic and access to the data of cloud providers spurred by the actions of former NSA contractor Edward Snowden may or may not have hurt national security, depending on who you ask. But according to a recent survey by the industry organization Cloud Security Alliance (CSA), the exposure of NSA's PRISM program is having a very real impact on the bottom line of US cloud service providers in the form of lost overseas customers. Twitter UK chief responds to abuse concerns after campaigner is deluged with rape threats >> The Next Web Appearing to respond to a petition that says Twitter's "current reporting system is below required standards," Twitter UK General Manager Tony Wang said in a series of tweets that the company "take(s) online abuse seriously" and will "suspend accounts that, once reported to us, are found to be in breach of our rules." Google's Hugo Barra: Android tablets have 'been lagging,' but change is coming >> The Verge The market for Android tablets is exploding. From the end of 2012 to the end of this June, Android tablet activations jumped from 10 million to 70 million. Nearly one in every two tablets sold nowadays runs Android, Google says. And of all the Android tablets sold over the last year, more than 10 percent were Google's Nexus 7, elevating the small slate to blockbuster status for the Nexus line. But as big as the growth spurt is, Android tablets still lag behind Apple's iPads -- not only is there an undeniable lack of compelling tablet apps, Google executives say hardware needs to step up, too. How Samsung is beating Apple in China >> Reuters Apple Inc this week said its revenue in Greater China, which also includes Hong Kong and Taiwan, slumped 43 percent to $4.65 billion from the previous quarter. That was also 14 percent lower from the year-ago quarter. Sales were weighed down by a sharp drop in revenues from Hong Kong. "It's not totally clear why that occurred," Cook said on a conference call with analysts. Neither is it totally clear what Apple's strategy is to deal with Samsung - not to mention a host of smaller, nimbler Chinese challengers. Steve Jobs - the least disruptive entrepreneur ever >> ReadWrite There is a vogue in Silicon Valley today for disruption--the eruptive flood of change, washing away the old and leaving in place the new. Founders are courted by venture capitalists based on their brash declarations of which billion-dollar industry they will overturn. But the message of "Jobs" is quite different. What we learn by watching Jobs over the decades, from the '70s to the earliest years of the present millennium, is that he was at his best not when he disrupted but when he took what was broken and fixed it. Disruption is facile. Disruption is easy. Disruption is ineffective. It's the technological equivalent of a temper tantrum--nothing more. What Jobs did at Apple is the exact opposite. Apple's Boston-area team: working on speech in Nuance's backyard >> Xconomy It's been one of the Boston-area tech industry's more intriguing questions for months: Just what is Apple doing here? Today, we've got an answer. Apple has assembled a small team of notable names in speech technology and is looking to expand those efforts in the Boston area, industry sources tell Xconomy. Based on their online job profiles, we can say that members of the Apple speech team here are working on Siri, the company's voice-activated virtual assistant. Details beyond that are hard to come by, however, even for others in the field. Nuance is behind key technologies used in Siri (and Samsung's S-Voice). Google ends Chromecast-Netflix promotion 'due to overwhelming demand' >> latimes.com "Due to overwhelming demand for Chromecast devices since launch, the 3-month Netflix promotion (which was available in limited quantities) is no longer available," Google told The LA Times in a statement. Partly because of the Netflix promotion, Chromecast has been selling fast. Both Amazon.com and BestBuy.com sold out of the device by Thursday morning (BestBuy.com is selling the device again). The device can be purchased from the Google Play online store, but it has a shipping wait time of three to four weeks. Wonder how many it sold. Meanwhile you could still buy Google TV.. anyone? Hello? You can follow Guardian Technology's linkbucket on Pinboard. To suggest a link, either add it below or tag it with @gdntech on the free Delicious service.