Open up trade agreements You reported that the US administration is giving ambassadorships to Obama campaign fundraisers and working with Microsoft to spy indiscriminately on US and foreign nationals (Embassy posts go to Obama's big donors; NSA 'works with Microsoft', 19 July). This is the state that Timothy Garton Ash (Where Dr Pangloss meets Machiavelli) hopes will be successful in bringing the world, including China, to so-called free trade and investment agreements like the TPP and TTIP currently being negotiated. He imagines that this will lead China towards "more openness, pluralism and the rule of law". The facts are that these agreements will lead to further concentration of transnational corporate wealth and power and associated political corruption – which means less liberty, equality and solidarity for the rest of us. Not even the elected representatives of the US have access to these negotiations – let alone the citizens of many countries who will have to live with the consequences of agreements that could see them paying more for medicines, books, films, software, education and many more things. The only chance the 99% have of seeing a more open, pluralistic and just world through trade will be when there is genuine democratic participation in the agreement negotiation process. Americans, Chinese or New Zealanders – we're all deprived of that at present, and until we get it, words like "openness" and "pluralism" have a very hollow ring to them. Christine Dann Port Levy, New Zealand Dangerous algorithms That our lives are increasingly governed by algorithms is scarcely news to many of us (26 July). Here in Australia the political playing field bears a remarkable resemblance to American football. Every move and counter-move is informed, if not dictated, by party analysts who study opinion polls, focus groups and the talk-back radio shock-jocks. The recent political exhumation of Kevin Rudd, as well as his subsequent leap to the right on key policies such as refugees, is a good example of this disturbing trend in our so-called democracy. The quest for what in my school days was called the lowest common denominator is equally apparent in Britain, the US and other countries where the two-party system is entrenched. We should be grateful to the Guardian, WikiLeaks, Edward Snowden and others of like mind for exposing the reality beneath the emperor's clothes, although I fear it may be too late to avoid the consequences. In the broadest possible sense the algorithm is indeed the instrument of the powerful: the extent of data-sharing now revealed between government and social media is just one factor among many. Noel Bird Boreen Point, Queensland, Australia Regulate oil transport Forgotten in the article Pipeline or railroad: which is safer? (19 July), are the 48 mostly young people who died in the Lac-Mégantic rail disaster in Quebec, Canada, and the disruptions and hardships caused when the whole centre of a town was wiped out. What transport mode spills the most oil is not the question. What kills the most? That is the question. What mode of transport puts people's lives at risk? The train that blew up, made up of 72 tanker cars, had already passed though many towns, in some cases close to schools, residential areas and industrial zones on its 4,000km journey from North Dakota. "Get the hell off oil" is good rhetoric; in the meantime strict government regulation (self-regulation by the railways, as now exists is a ludicrous oxymoron) could save lives and the environment. Tom Edmonds Cowansville, Quebec, Canada Snooping and security In Snooping does not keep us secure (12 July), Suzanne Moore claims that John Locke said, "as soon as men decide all means are permitted to fight an evil, then their good becomes indistinguishable from the evil they set out to destroy". I was puzzled to hear this attributed to a man who argued that we may kill a thief who might intend only to steal our goods, as any incursion on property rights is a potential threat to one's life. Locke also characterised such persons as noxious beasts rather than full human beings. In fact, the quotation comes from an article by Christopher Dawson. Unfortunately, this false attribution has now run rampant across the internet. While Moore is rightly concerned about ubiquitous surveillance and champions free communication, we also need to be vigilant about the propagation of false or misleading information – an abuse of freedom. Comment is free, but should also be responsible. Simon Kow Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada • Suzanne Moore's piece reminds me of a paraphrase of the slogan of the Returned Services League of Australia: "The price of liberty is eternal vigilance"; the rather more ominous "The price of eternal vigilance is liberty." Phillip Mackenzie Gosnells, Western Australia Irreconcilable opposites Can political Islam ever work? (12 July). I very much doubt it. If one casts even a cursory glance over the 1700 or so blood-soaked years of political Christianity (starting from the emperor Constantine), one is unlikely to feel optimistic. And it's still not over. Contemporary born-again Tea Partiers would turn the US into a theocracy overnight if they could – in a nation that was founded on the 18th-century Enlightenment principle of the complete separation of church and state. I see no evidence that political Islam has discovered, or is ever likely to discover, a better way than Christian power regimes have historically found to meld an obligatory religious ideology with any socio-political formations that ultimately rest upon some manner, however imperfect, of informed consent. Irreconcilably contradictory aims. David Bouvier Gabriola, British Columbia, Canada A tourist's view of Tibet The Letter from China in your 19 July issue is a typical tourist description of Tibet by the Chinese (A bit of heaven mingled with the smell of yak). In fact, Langmusi is far from the idyllic charming Shangri-la that it might appear, as I found out when I visited it last year. Although incorporated into the Chinese provinces of Sichuan and Gansu, this area was totally Tibetan until the Chinese invasion in 1950, as proved in a fascinating book by Robert Ekvall, an American anthropologist-missionary who lived there in the 1930s. As your writer says, there are now, and were in Ekvall's days, two Tibetan Buddhist monasteries that have always been rivals. Both these monasteries were ruined in the Cultural Revolution. What has changed recently is that one of these monasteries is now actively supported by the Chinese government. When I visited this monastery I was amazed at the beautiful gold-gilded temples and stupas being built by non-Tibetans. I found out that this monastery, which is being rebuilt at great cost, is of the recent Shugden Buddhist sect, which is very antagonistic to the Dalai Lama. In present-day Tibet, all is not as the Chinese authorities would like it to appear. And your readers should not forget that Langmusi is a centre for many recent self-immolations by Tibetans in a desperate protest against Chinese oppression. Nigel Hungerford Hawthorn, Victoria, Australia Trident is the problem May I remind Sir Nick Harvey that the imposition of a nuclear submarine base in 1960 in the heart of Scotland has already soured the relationship (19 July). No thought was given to Scottish protests that this base could kill more than 2 million Scottish people in the event of an attack or an accident. We came perilously close to a first-strike attack during the Cuban missile crisis between the USSR and the US. Instead of throwing around the huge cost of moving this base as a scare campaign, I suggest the MoD tell us which part of England will host the new base. Perhaps the Bristol Channel will be given the order, as it has a great stretch of water with access to the open seas. Anna Smith Coogee, NSW, Australia A hologram might be better The techniques of French taxidermy used to preserve the carapace and skin of Kiki, the 146-year-old tortoise, are uncannily close to those performed by the embalmers' guild in ancient Egypt: "alum salt to tan the hide" (natron for desiccation); "black glass eyeballs" (glass or stone); the thorax hollowed of viscera (ditto, but collected in canopic jars); "extra-dark acrylic paint" and "the shell varnished" (resins, oils and dyes); "[feet] padded out with sterile wood-fibre" (sawdust and leaf detritus) (Creating a likeness to challenge death, 19 July). The Egyptians dolled up not just humans but cats by the million. Yet the effect for me is as ghoulish as Lenin's mummy in his glass case or the Madame Tussaud's stiffs. If "the aim is for the end result to look as natural as possible", why not rather generate holographic images of a Kiki living and in action? RM Fransson Denver, Colorado, US Where has Merkel been? Countries who habitually gather data from the electronic media, Germany and the UK among them, are presently displaying an apparently righteous indignation at discovering that the US is also gathering international internet data (Merkel: snooping on friends is unacceptable, 5 July). Where has Angela Merkel been so as not to know how the international information game is played? Is she simply trying to save another election by pretending innocence? The real issue is not the gathering of data but why officials and other individuals expose themselves so badly in emails and on pseudo-social networking sites. The gatherer is not at fault, it is the distributor of garbage, both opinionated and secret. Merkel should instead be chastising her minions for revealing information: secret or salacious. A ban on employees posting on Twitter, Facebook and other sites would go a long way to solving Merkel's problem. John Graham Hoogstraten, Belgium Briefly • Congratulations to Hadley Freeman on her insightful 19 July feature on sexism and Wimbledon. Brian A Wren Orleans, Massachusetts, US • Had the royal arrival been a girl, Great-gran's name Elizabeth would have been favourite, but not Great-gramps's Philip, since we already had one Bad King Philip, spouse of Mary I, and sender of the Armada against Good Queen Bess (26 July). C Lendon Cook, ACT, Australia Please send letters to weekly.letters@guardian.co.uk