Barack Obama was meeting members of Congress at the Oval Office on Thursday as an increasingly embattled White House seeks to contain growing anger over the surveillance tactics employed by the National Security Agency. Republican and Democrats have been invited to the meeting, just 24 hours after the Guardian revealed details of another National Security Agency surveillance program which, according to documents, allows analysts to to search through huge databases of emails, online chats and the browsing histories without prior authorisation. The training documents provided by whistleblower Edward Snowden suggested that the program, called XKeyscore, is its "widest-reaching" system for developing intelligence from the internet. Snowden left the limbo of Moscow airport on Thursday after being granted permission to stay in Russia for a year. Hours after details of the XKeystone were published, the White House press spokesman, Jay Carney, declined to say whether the administration had informed Congress about the program. "I don't know the answer to that," he said at Wednesday's White House briefing. The delegation of lawmakers from the Senate and House of Representatives meeting the president reportedly consisted of leaders of the intelligence committees and some of the administration's most vocal critics. They are said to include Democratic senators Ron Wyden, Mark Udall and Dick Durbin, and the Republican congressman Jim Sensenbrenner, all of whom are involved in legislative efforts on Capitol Hill to rein in the NSA. Sensenbrenner, the original author of the Patriot Act, voted in favour of a House bill last week which sought to effectively terminate the NSA's mass collection of phone records. The vote was narrowly lost but exposed the breadth of concern in Washington over the the power of the NSA to monitor communications with only limited oversight. Additionally, Alexander was briefing lawmakers in classified session for the first time since the House's nearly successful effort to end the phone records bulk collection, which he had furiously lobbied House members to retain. Almost two months on from the initial NSA disclosures in the Guardian and Washington Post, based on documents leaked by Snowden, the White House appears to have entered a new phase as it seeks to head off criticism. The president has directed intelligence officials to find ways to make the NSA programs "as transparent as possible", while senior administration officials have testified before congress that they are open to reforming the foreign intelligence surveillance court (Fisa), which issues orders for surveillance. On Wednesday, the administration voluntarily declassified previously top-secret documents in a bid to mollify critics. Officials pointed to the documents to claim the surveillance programs are restrained, as rules imposed by the foreign intelligence surveillance court require analysts to only search through phone data if they have "reasonable articulable suspicion" the phone number is associated with terrorism or espionage. But several senators on the judiciary committee objected during a contentious Wednesday hearing that Americans' privacy is already compromised once the NSA collects their phone records in bulk without suspicion of wrongdoing. Congress is  becoming increasingly sceptical about the assurances given by intelligence officials. At the Senate judiciary committee hearing, the Democratic chairman Patrick Leahy told a panel of senior administration officials: "We need straightforward answers, and I'm concerned we're not getting them." While NSA officials have routinely described the bulk phone records collection of Americans' phone records as vital to preventing terrorist attacks, the NSA's deputy director, John Inglis, conceded that it was crucial to stopping a terrorist plot in at most one case during its seven years of existence. No one in the administration has been more strongly accused of misleading lawmakers than James Clapper, the director of national intelligence, who was recently forced to apologise for erroneous testimony he gave to a congressional committee. Clapper, who testified that the US does not wittingly collect data on millions of Americans, later described his evidence as the "least untruthful" answer he could give. In deciding to declassify certain NSA documents and not others, Clapper has now prompted further allegations that he has misled Congress over the legitimacy of surveillance methods. Two of the documents were broad summaries of secret NSA programs delivered to Congress before key surveillance votes in 2009 and 2011. They describe a now-abandoned effort to collect Internet and email records in bulk as a "vital capability." Wyden, in a CNN interview Wednesday, cited that description out as an example of what he called deception of Congress by the US intelligence agencies, as the program had been "in effect worthless." "That's the reason that it was eliminated. And yet the intelligence community, when they first described it a few days ago, they said [the cancellation of the program] was for operational reasons," he said. The program, first disclosed by the Guardian last month, was abandoned by the Obama administration for "operational and resource reasons," according to Shawn Turner, the director of communications for national intelligence. Wyden added: "On issue after issue, too many of the leaders in the intelligence community have not just kept the Congress in the dark." The US administration has yet to respond in detail to disclosures about XKeyscore, which privacy experts underscores the ability of NSA officials to access the content of almost all internet activity. The program's training manuals detail how analysts can use it to sift through giant agency databases by filling in a simple on-screen form that requires only a broad justification for the search. The request is not reviewed by a court or any NSA personnel before it is processed. One presentation claims the program covers "nearly everything a typical user does on the internet", including the content of emails, websites visited and searches. White House spokesman Jay Carney suggested there were "false claims" in the Guardian article, but did not specify what they were. "As we've explained, and the intelligence community has explained, allegations of widespread, unchecked analyst access to NSA collection data are false," he said. "Access to all of NSA's analytic tools is limited to only those personnel who require access for their assigned tasks. There are multiple technical, manual and supervisory checks and balances within the system to prevent those who don't have access from achieving that access." He said he did not know whether the administration had informed Congress about XKeyscore, adding: "Informing people about false claims isn't necessarily what we do." Two leaders of the House intelligence committee, which has been criticised for not providing rigorous enough oversight of the NSA, condemned the Guardian's disclosures. Mike Rogers, the Republican chairman, and the ranking Democrat Dutch Ruppersberger, who are among the delegation meeting the president at the White House, said: "The latest in the parade of classified leaks published today is without context and provides a completely inaccurate picture of the program," they said in a joint statement. They said XKeyscore was "simply a tool used by our analysts to better understand foreign intelligence". Earlier on Wednesday, the director of the National Security Agency was heckled at a conference of hackers as he sought to offer a defense of US surveillance, insisting it had been instrumental in disrupting dozens of attacks. General Keith Alexander told the Black Hat convention in Las Vegas: "The assumption is our people are just out there wheeling and dealing. Nothing could be further from the truth. We have tremendous oversight over these programmes. We can audit the actions of our people 100%, and we do that." He added: "I have four daughters. Can I go and intercept their emails? No. The technical limitations are in there." Additional reporting by Rory Carroll in Las Vegas