Sheremetyevo airport outside Moscow, where Edward Snowden spent 40 days in legal limbo. Photograph: Alexander Zemlianichenko/AP By the time he was granted temporary asylum in Russia and left Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport on Thursday, the National Security Agency whistleblower Edward Snowden had spent 40 days in the confines of the airport's transit zone. According to his lawyer Anatoly Kucherena, Snowden kept himself busy by reading Russian literature and history and learning the Russian alphabet. The circumstances of his stay in Sheremetyevo were similar to "house arrest, only not at home", said Kucherena, who noted the psychological pressures of remaining confined indoors in a legal no man's land. "I wouldn't have held out for 24 hours with him in the airport," he said. "What is the transit zone? It's a sterile zone. There are constant loudspeaker announcements every day – a flight from Washington has arrived, a flight from London has arrived, a flight from Barcelona has arrived. I heard them for hours when I was there. If a person is there indefinitely it can drive him to psychosis." Kucherena began helping Snowden to seek temporary asylum in Russia after a meeting between the whistleblower and government and human rights officials on 12 July, and he became Snowden's only human connection with the outside world. He went to the airport several times a week, taken each time by bus from the departures area to a room where Snowden had no bodyguards or minders. Snowden had arrived with almost no luggage, so the lawyer brought him new shirts and a new pair of shoes, as well as books. The American had little to do besides surf the internet and read. Kucherena said he selected a number of classic books to help Snowden understand the mentality of the Russian people: Fyodor Dostoyevsky's Crime and Punishment, a collection of stories by Anton Chekhov, and writings by the historian Nikolai Karamzin. Snowden quickly finished Crime and Punishment. After reading selections from Karamzin, a 19th-century writer who penned the first comprehensive history of the Russian state, he asked for the author's complete works. Kucherena also gave Snowden an alphabet book to help him to start learning Russian. Snowden was not able to go outside – "he breathes disgusting air, the air of the airport," Kucherena said – but nevertheless remained in good health and told his lawyer he had "been in worse circumstances". Nonetheless, the psychological pressures of the waiting game took its toll. "It's hard for him, when he's always in a state of expectation," Kucherena said. "On the inside, Edward is absolutely independent, he absolutely follows his convictions. As for the reaction, he is convinced and genuinely believes he did it first of all so that Americans and all people would find out that they are spying on us." After appearing on a Russian news show via video link with Snowden's father, Lon, Kucherena has been helping the elder Snowden obtain a visa to visit his son in Russia. Kucherena said he spoke with Lon Snowden after the show to discuss the logistics of a trip, which the lawyer said should be possible to arrange despite there being "some sort of game with the FBI that is not legal". "It's visible that he worries about his son, which is important," Kucherena said. "He's proud that his son grew up to be such a person … He understands what a burden his son is bearing now, the pressure on him. "He asked me to say hi to Edward and give him a hug. He wants to see him," he added. Snowden has reportedly spoken with his father only through intermediaries. Kucherena said he did not know whether the whistleblower was in touch with other families or friends, or with his girlfriend. People had been writing from all over Russia offering Snowden lodging, protection and money, Kucherena said. "I was surprised there was so much activity on the part of Russians and such concern about him," he said. The lawyer denied that he or Snowden had had any contact with foreign governments, or that he had spoken with the Kremlin about Snowden's asylum. "I don't need to talk to high-ranking officials," Kucherena said. "I don't want to engage in big politics. [Law] is my trade."