3.15pm BST Here’s a summary of what we know so far. • Edward Snowden has left Moscow’s Sheremetyevo airport and has entered Russia, according to his lawyer and WikiLeaks, which has been helping him. • Anatoly Kucherena, lawyer for the whistleblower – whose leaks to the Guardian about US surveillance caused shockwaves around the world – said Snowden had been granted temporary asylum for one year. It is unclear whether Snowden is planning to stay in Russia permanently, as his lawuer hinted recently, or will attempt to move on to one of the Latin American countries he said last month had offered him asylum: Venezuela, Bolivia, Nicaragua and Ecuador. WikiLeaks said: “We have won the battle – now the war”, perhaps hinting at a further asylum claim to come. • Kucherena declined to provide details about where Snowden would be staying in Russia. “He is the most wanted man on planet earth. What do you think he is going to do? He has to think about his personal security. I cannot tell you where he is going,” he said. Snowden would choose his own place of residence, but it would not be an embassy, he said. Snowden left the airport by taxi. • In the US, senator Robert Menendez, chair of the Senate foreign relations committee, said Snowden was a "fugitive who belongs in a United States courtroom" and said the episode had damaged US-Russian relations. US senator John McCain tweeted to point out – as many have done – an apparent contradiction between Snowden’s ideals and the actions of the Russian government. But a senior Kremlin official said ties between Russia and the US would not suffer because of the "relatively insignificant" Snowden case. • Snowden's lawyer said he would speak to the media after a day or so acclimatising. WikiLeaks said it would release a statement by Snowden on the Bradley Manning whistleblowing case – which has been compared to his own – later today. • Two new photographs said to be of Snowden emerged: one showing him getting out of a car, one showing the documents issued for him by Russia. Very few photographs have emerged of the whistleblower since he revealed his identity in June. • Kucherena pointed out that yesterday's Guardian story revealing a top secret National Security Agency programme allowing analysts to search with no prior authorisation through vast databases containing emails, online chats and the browsing histories of millions of individuals was based on documents given to the paper before Snowden agreed to stop leaking – a key condition of his asylum offer from Russia. Vladimir Putin had previously said he would be welcome only if he stopped "his work aimed at bringing harm" to the United States – "as strange as that sounds coming from my mouth." Updated at 3.19pm BST