VK … the 'Russian Facebook' is hiring. Age: Launched in October 2006. Appearance: Almost identical to Facebook. What does VK stand for? It's short for VKontakte. Which is Russian for "in contact". And what is VK? Russia's biggest social network. How big are we talking here? Big. The site has an estimated 46 million users a day and around 220 million accounts. That is big. Where did it come from? From Russia's answer to Mark Zuckerberg, young entrepreneur Pavel Durov. He set up VKontakte after leaving university, aged 21. And what has he done now? Offered Edward Snowden a job. The NSA whistleblower? Yes, that Edward Snowden. The one who revealed to the world that the NSA have access to users' data from every major social networking site – including VK's global rival Facebook. Is he looking for work then? He may be. He has just been granted one year's temporary asylum in Russia. So he might be up for finding something to fill his days. What's the job? Durov wants him to help VK with their data protection measures. He announced on his profile: "We invite Edward Snowden to Petersburg and will be happy if he decides to join the star team of programmers at VKontakte." Is Snowden likely to accept? Probably not. VK has come under pressure from the Russian government after Durov's refusal to block opposition groups from the site in 2011. What pressure? The site was later "accidentally" black-listed by the Russian media regulator – a move one analyst described as a warning to be "more compliant". And, since then, VK's offices and Durov's home have been raided by Russian police, Durov has disappeared into hiding, and a private equity firm with close ties to the Kremlin has bought a 48% stake in the company. Meaning? Meaning VK may now be under closer scrutiny by its own government than before. So it really is almost identical to Facebook then? Pretty much. Do say: "Sounds like the ideal job for a world-famous whistleblower." Don't say: "It's as if we can't even trust the Russian government any more."