Edward Snowden in his new refugee documents granted by Russia in Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport August 1, 2013. Photograph: Handout/REUTERS Russian human rights activists welcomed the decision to give temporary asylum to National Security Agency whistleblower Edward Snowden on Thursday, but pointed out that Moscow was unlikely to look kindly on local whistleblowers who leaked its secrets. Sergei Nikitin, the head of Amnesty International Russia, pointed out that Russia was not usually a staunch defender of transparency. Asked what would happen to a whistleblower who exposed Russian secrets, Nikitin said that he or she would likely be persecuted by the state. "We could probably expect a diametrically opposed reaction by the countries that participated in this," he said. Like the NSA in the United States, Russian security services reportedly have far-reaching abilities to monitor telephone and internet communications in their own country through a program known by its Russian acronym SORM. "It should be noted that the Russian Federation is a country that human rights organisations have found to be a serious violator of human rights including the right to express information," Nikitin said. "Human rights are international and to give these rights only to certain people is not fair." Former Pussy Riot lawyer Mark Feigin questioned whether Snowden would be safe in Russia. "Snowden doesn't fully understand that accepting asylum in Russia is about the same as agreeing to receive an inheritance from a lawyer in Nigeria by email," Feigin tweeted Thursday. Nikitin and Tanya Lokshina of Human Rights Watch have criticised president Vladimir Putin's statements that Snowden must stop harming the United States if he wants to stay in Russia. The right to asylum should not be tied to political concerns, they have said. Boris Ratnikov, a former major-general of the Federal Guard Service, told the newspaper Izvestiya that the whistleblower remained in limbo. "If there was a firm decision to defend Snowden, they would have given him citizenship. One-year temporary asylum is 'he's neither ours nor yours'," he said. A mid-July poll found that 51% of Russians approved of Snowden's whistleblowing activities and 43% supported granting him asylum in the country. Snowden's lawyer Anatoly Kucherena has been receiving letters and calls in support of his client following the asylum approval. "Many people in Russia hope that he will quickly adapt to life here and support him," Kucherena said.