Credible Likeable Superstar Rolemodel. Photograph: Christa Holka Credible Likeable Superstar Role Model, Edinburgh Bryony Kimmings's 2010 fringe debut, Sex Idiot, about having an STD, was very revealing and cheeky too. Not least in the way she fashioned a moustache out of the audience's pubic hair. That's not really the kind of thing that happens in a theatre every day. 2011's 7 Day Drunk explored the effects of alcohol on young women and was no less bold in its combination of social experiment and theatre. Now she returns to the fringe with her nine-year-old niece, Taylor, to examine the damage caused by the sexualisation of kids. The aim is not to call for censorship but to raise the issue and encourage debate. Kimmings is likely to do it in a fashion that will be irreverent yet thought-provoking. Pleasance Theatre, to 25 Aug LG As Is, London The Normal Heart was probably the most successful of all the plays about Aids in the 1980s, and is due out as a film next year, directed by Glee creator Ryan Murphy and starring Julia Roberts and Mark Ruffalo. But just before Larry Kramer's angry account of the battle of gay men to get help opened in 1985 there was another play, As Is, by William Hoffman. It made it to Broadway and premiered here in 1987 at the Half Moon Theatre. Now you can see it at the Finborough, a stone's throw from Earls Court, where London's gay community thrived at that time. It's a gentler play than Kramer's, looking at the effects of the pandemic on a group of New York friends. It should be a period piece, a slice of history, but, sadly, rates of HIV infection are still on the rise. Finborough Theatre, SW10, Tue to 31 Aug MC Summerhall, Edinburgh This wonderful courtyard venue has a very continental feel with a programme of European work to match, sitting alongside top-notch homegrown theatre. You could quite happily spend your entire festival here, taking in return hits such as Stellar Quines's devastating one-woman The List, last year's provocative hit La Merda, or the visually haunting Tourniquet 2013 from Belgium's Abattoir Fermé, which comes trailing critical praise. There's also UK work from emerging artists including Victoria Melody's Major Tom (pictured); Our Fathers, Babakas's investigation into fatherhood; Paper Cinema's handmade The Odyssey; and Made In China's latest, Gym Party. Summerhall, Sat to 24 Aug LG The Thebans Season, London It's no surprise that the annual free season at the Scoop should focus on Greek plays, given that the space is configured like a Greek amphitheatre. It's also fitting given that the current incumbent of the neighbouring City Hall, Boris Johnson, is no stranger to the concepts of tragedy and comedy. This year, in its 11th season, director Phil Willmott offers his take on the Thebans, three plays by Sophocles inspired by the Greek city of Thebes. At 6pm there is a family production, Prince Of Thebes, bringing comedy, music and puppetry to the tale of Oedipus. As dusk gathers at 8pm, things will get darker with Oedipus And Antigone, chronicling the downfall of the Theban royal family. As ever there's no charge: you just turn up and there's room for an audience of 1,000. The Scoop, SE1, Wed to Fri, to 1 Sep, plus perfs Sat & Sun from 10 Aug MC The Radicalisation Of Bradley Manning, Edinburgh With the Edward Snowden saga all over the news, there's no better time to return to Tim Price's play about the Wikileaking US soldier. At the time of going to press, Manning is being court-martialled for releasing secret embassy cables and military logs, pertaining to the Iraq and Afghan wars. With performances being live streamed, this show finds a way for audiences to contribute to the debate surrounding whistleblowers and issues of government behaviour and secrecy. Price has another debate-provoking show at the fringe, too. I'm With The Band, which premieres at the Traverse (Sat to 25 Aug) uses the break-up of an indie act to consider a changing political landscape. Pleasance Theatre, Tue to 25 Aug LG Northern Stage, Edinburgh For years the big venues such as Assembly, the Pleasance and Underbelly dominated the Edinburgh fringe. But recently others have challenged that model. Northern Stage at St Stephen's is one of them and arrived at the festival last year. The idea is to enable individual artists and companies who would never be able to make it to Edinburgh on their own to perform under an umbrella showcasing work made in the north of England. Several of last year's artists and companies are returning, including Daniel Bye, who will be premiering How To Occupy An Oil Rig, and Third Angel, which will be revisiting the wonderful What I Heard About The World (20-24 Aug), as well as offering Cape Wrath, an epic journey in a stationary minibus. St Stephen's, Sat to 24 Aug LG