The BBC spends £430m a year on news. The law cannot go on pretending it doesn't exist. Photograph: PA The foundations of Britain's media industry began to shift a little last week. Everything is in flux: old rules about ownership heading for the bin, new concepts jostling for recognition. You think that's exaggeration? Try the Department for Culture, Media and Sport's consultation document on plurality in newspapers and broadcasting. It raises the prospect, at last, of counting the BBC as part of the news landscape, and – at last, at last – recognises the existence of news online. You can't get much more revolutionary. Media plurality in existing law is pretty simple – and wholly out of date. Enforcing monopoly rules, it prevents companies that command more than 20% of the newspaper market from owning more than 20% of terrestrial Channels 3 or 5. That "Murdoch clause" betrays fear of a ravenous Rupert swallowing all competition and ruling the world. Park that apprehension as Google surges past Murdoch Inc, with BT knocking on his door. Old plurality was about caging the beast, keeping a diversity of voices. New plurality wants to define those voices afresh. The BBC, notes the DCMS, spends £430m a year on news provision – more than all other UK broadcasting put together. It reaches 86% of the population and accounts for 73% of TV news-watching. How, for plurality purposes, can you pretend it doesn't exist? Of course it operates under a pall of officially prescribed fairness and balance. But that, in itself, limits its plurality role. It can't (see the latest contentious BBC Trust verdict) let John Humphrys loose for an individually crafted report on welfare dependency. It demands facts, figures and equivalencies, not personal perceptions. And the BBC is held to account for what it reports, not for what it leaves out. Sometimes it picks up a newspaper story and runs hard with it. Sometimes not. Sometimes Edward Snowden may as well not exist. It's often a negative power, but it is power. You can't calculate pluralism without it. It's the same online, as bbc.co.uk scoops up 40 million or so unique visitors in Britain alone. What's the point of counting paper copies when the Telegraph can boast a combined monthly reach of 10.7 million? When the Guardian notches 12.4 million and the Mail 18.8 million. Even the Sun, at 16.9 million, doesn't seem such a winner in company like this – and, as the consultation adds, that's before you drop in the Huffington Post, Google News and more in a market place that obeys few conventional rules. Consider the Sun, with its paywall. The deals that may help it – Premier League goals on your smartphone – are exactly the kind of Murdoch gambit his opponents fear. But how to measure their impact? Not by counting unique visitors, the standard extrapolation of success - facts BBC websites use for self-validation. Quite the contrary, as an exultant Mirror pointed out: Sun paywalls will see its influence and impact shrink. The Times, behind its own wall, has only 393,000 digital visitors – a pallid shadow of what its rivals can claim. Indeed, their overall market share is bound to increase as Sun totals shrivel. This is pluralism in self-induced reverse. Maria Miller, the culture secretary, cites Lord Leveson: he called for the out-of-time law and its definitions to be updated. But Leveson, in truth, didn't have a blind idea of how to tackle this quagmire of questions. He settled much too easily, for regulatory structures devised 20 years ago. At least the government has picked up the challenge. The answers will not be simple or comfortably consistent in an age where size and influence keep splitting apart. Keeping Rupert in a box is one thing: defining how that digital box fits into a wider spectrum of constant change is quite another. We've started: heaven knows how we'll finish.