Top eight stories on MediaGuardian Peter Capaldi announced as Doctor Who star Scottish actor best known for his role as Malcom Tucker in The Thick of It to film his first scenes as Time Lord this autumn Mary Beard is latest to get Twitter bomb threat Historian is targeted as many boycott Twitter in protest at slow response to abusive tweets and rape threats Sydney's Daily Telegraph headline prompts Rudd attack on Murdoch News Corp defends 'kick this mob out' front page as PM urges voters to make up their own minds about 'fairness and balance' James Bond and Sherlock composer David Arnold: 'He doesn't follow the herd' The writer of the scores for Quantum of Solace, Hot Fuzz and more how he tackles his work – and what John Barry told him Africa's media voices need wider support Ian Birrell: Countries such as Ethiopia receive aid from the west, but are jailing their journalists – media owners and managers must act Liverpool's US owner buys Boston Globe John Henry scoops newspaper from New York Times for £52m Andrew Marr: 'I'm going to be sweeter all round' The TV presenter tells Robert McCrum of his fight back to health CBS suffers Time Warner Cable blackout Three million cable subscribers no longer have access to shows including Hawaii Five-0 due to dispute over fees Top comment on MediaGuardian BBC in the crosshairs as government lines up media plurality review Steve Hewlett: The government's plans have potentially serious implications for the corporation – and the press is eager to get stuck in Today's headlines The Guardian Peter Capaldi unveiled as new Doctor Who star. P1,3 Mark Lawson: Peter Capaldi will bring an edge of danger to the Doctor. P3 Mary Beard is latest woman to receive Twitter bomb threat. P5 The reader's editor on the Guardian's duty of care to Edward Snowden. P23 Steve Hewlett: BBC in the crosshairs as government lines up plurality review. P26 Ian Birrell: Africa's media voices need wider support. P26 Interview with James Bond and Sherlock composer David Arnold. P27 Interview with Caroline Criado-Perez on the Twitter abuse row. G2 P6-9 Sam Wollaston on Channel 4's Southcliffe. G2 P21 Daily Telegraph Peter Capaldi unveiled as new Doctor Who star. P1,3 BBC's Holby City blamed for scaring off organ donors. P9 Max Pemberton: Lads' mags represent women better than women's magazines. P18 Benji Wilson on on Channel 4's Southcliffe. P24 US digital group buys Newsweek's remains. Business P1 Vodafone seeks €1bn in Italian lawsuit. Business P4 Financial Times Apple decision by Obama administration risks US push for stricter patent regimes. P4 Vodafone seeks €1bn in Italian lawsuit. P16 Publicis chief Maurice Lévy puts accent on loyalty. P18 The Times Peter Capaldi is new Doctor Who star. P1,3 Bill Giles says BBC colleagues plotted to oust him. P3 Public could pay for press regulator, says Hacked Off. P8 BBC's 'arrogant army of bureaucrats' condemned. P8 Thousands stop tweeting but sexist threats go on. P9 Leader on Doctor Who. P24 iPhone ban reversal. P33 Ruby Wax interview. T2 P6 The Independent Peter Capaldi is new Doctor Who star. P3 Mary Beard's Twitter bomb threat. P5 Obituary: John Amis, music critic and broadcaster. P45 Channel 4 must find a 'hero programme' to secure its future. P51 Tim Westwood - a DJ still at the top of its game. P51 Countryfile stars breach editorial standards. P51 i Mary Beard alerts police over Twitter death threats. P5 Peter Capaldi unveiled as new Doctor Who star. P9 Matthew Sweet on Peter Capaldi. P9 Obituary: critic and broadcaster John Amis. P12 Ian Burrell: Channel 4 needs a homegrown hit. P41 Media Diary. P41 Daily Mail Was there a BBC betting coup on new Doctor Who? P1 After all the hype, Peter Capaldi had better be good. P5 Britain home to half a million porn websites. P12 How can you trust a single word on Tripadvisor? P15 Nicholas Parsons says being a 'dollybird' is not demeaning. P31 Daily Express Peter Capaldi is new Doctor Who star. P3 Fiona Fullerton to appear on Strictly Come Dancing. P24 The Queen has catchup TV. P19 The Sun Peter Capaldi's Doctor Who role costs bookies £100,000. P1 Leader on Doctor Who. P8 Peter Capaldi is new Doctor Who star. P9 Government slammed for having 1,500 Twitter accounts. P21 Samantha Womack on her EastEnders return. TVBiz, P1 Daily Mirror Peter Capaldi is new Doctor Who star. P7 Leader on Peter Capaldi. P8 Twitter trolls target Mary Beard. P19 ITV threatens to sue over Channel 4 Dispatches. P29 Daily Star Andrew Marr returns. P2 Peter Capaldi is new Doctor Who star. P3 Big Brother latest. P7 Stars' silent protest at Twitter bomb jibe. P13 Go to MediaGuardian