Jay Carney also sought to downplays effect of widespread closures on US diplomacy in Middle East and Africa. Photograph: Nir Elias/Reuters The White House has warned the terror alert which forced US embassy closures across the Middle East and Africa could continue for another four weeks as it revealed its intelligence indicated an ongoing threat "from now until the end of August". It was widely reported on Monday that the closures follow an intercepted communication between al-Qaida leader Ayman Zawahiri and the chief of the terrorist organization's Yemeni affiliate. Supporters of the NSA's surveillance tactics have used the latest threat to justify their opposition to reining in the agency's domestic spying activities. But the information related to the latest threat was collected overseas under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act – not the bulk surveillance programs disclosed by the Guardian and the Washington Post thanks to whistleblower Edward Snowden. White House spokesman Jay Carney distanced himself from those linking the scare to recent debates about the agency's surveillance power in the US. The White House and State Department also both sought to downplay the impact of the shutdown on the effectiveness of US diplomacy in the region, stressing the embassy closures should not be seen as indefinite. "This is a temporary measure and it is out of an abundance of caution," said Carney. "We are engaged around the world and that engagement creates some risk. This decision is designed to reduce that risk but our engagement will continue." In contrast to NSA supporters who have been quick to link the surveillance debate with the current scare, the White House sought to downplay any political implications. "I am not going to blend those two stories together," added Carney. "We have a threat that we have advised the public about and we have a set of issues regarding the unauthorised disclosure of classified information that has led to a debate about the balance between protecting our security and maintaining privacy – I wouldn't blend the two issues." The White House did however re-iterate its threat to boycott a planned bilateral summit with President Putin in Moscow in retaliation for its decision to grant temporary asylum to NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden. Asked if there was any relationship between the embassy alerts and the recent NSA controversies, Marie Harf, a State Department spokeswoman, said "I can assure that in no way, at all, period, affects" the State Department's threat assessment. While the administration did not make the link, others did. On Sunday, Rebublican senator Saxby Chambliss said the NSA had identified threats that were the most serious for years and akin to levels of "terrorist chatter" picked up before 9/11. "These [NSA] programs are controversial, we understand that," he told NBC's Meet the Press on Sunday. "But they are also very important … If we did not have these programs, then we simply would not be able to listen in on the bad guys." Critics of the NSA surveillance programs were measured in their responses. Senator Ron Wyden, the Oregon Democract who has been a longstanding voice against the bulk collection of phone records, said the latest threat was "serious". As a member of the Senate intelligence committee, Wyden receives classified briefings, but he added: "While I can't go into specific details, the vice chairman of the Senate intelligence committee noted yesterday that this information was collected using section 702 of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, rather than the Patriot Act. I still haven't seen any evidence that the NSA's dragnet surveillance of Americans' phone records is providing any unique value to American counterterrorism efforts." Privacy campaigners criticised the linking of the latest terror alerts with the debate over the domestic powers of the NSA. Amie Stepanovich, a lawyer with the Electronic Privacy Information Center, said: "The NSA's choice to publish these threats at this time perpetuates a culture of fear and unquestioning deference to surveillance in the United States." News of the fresh terror alert came as Congress looked increasingly likely to pursue fresh attempts to limit the NSA's domestic powers when it returns in September. "The NSA takes in threat information every day. You have to ask, why now? What makes this information different?" added Stepanovich. "Too much of what we hear from the government about surveillance is either speculation or sweeping assertions that lack corroboration. The question isn't if these programs used by this NSA can find legitimate threats, it's if the same threats couldn't be discovered in a less invasive manner. This situation fails to justify the NSA's unchecked access to our personal information." US embassies have been closed temporarily in response to similar perceived terrorist threats, but rarely for this long. Four embassies were closed for the first anniversary of 9/11 in 2002; six African embassies were closed for 3 days in June of 1999; and 38 embassies shut for 2 days in December 1998. "I don't want anyone to think we're leaning toward indefinite closure," Harf said, emphasizing that many of the embassies would largely have been closed or on relaxed hours due to the Eid holiday. Harf said the threat "looks credible" in response to a question about whether it might have been a decoy once revelations of NSA surveillance became public. "We continue to refine our assessment of the threat," Harf said.