Robert Mugabe's re-election as Zimbabwe's president last weekend raised eyebrows not just for the now-customary allegations of vote rigging, but also for the resigned mood of his political opponents. Far from the ebullient tone of the last election in 2008, the MDC leader Morgan Tsvangirai looked a broken man as Mugabe romped home with a suspiciously large majority. It was as if the will to resist Mugabe's iron grip on Zimbabwe had ebbed from Tsvangirai, the population at large and even the international community, some of whom seem to have decided opposing the 89-year-old is no longer worth the trouble. On our cover this week, the Guardian's southern Africa correspondent David Smith asks what another five years of Mugabe means for Zimbabwe and whether the only president the country has ever known will ever be dislodged by anything other than his own mortality. Inside the edition we bring you troubling news from Tunisia, where political and religious unrest is threatening to overwhelm the birthplace of the Arab spring. More encouraging developments in other parts of the region though, where Israel and Palestine have commenced fragile peace talks, and where Iran's new president Hassan Rouhani has moved to soften the rhetoric of the Islamic Republic. We have detailed analysis of and comment on both situations. In Europe, Italy's former prime minister Silvio Berlusconi is refusing to go quietly after being convicted for tax evasion, while the Spanish government is cranking up pressure on the UK over Gibraltar after a row over fishing limits. We also have an revealing Washington Post report from Latvia, where the jobs shortage is forcing many young people into entrepreneurial stop-gap occupations. In Australia, meanwhile, the Labor prime minister Kevin Rudd has called a September election in what looks like being a tight contest against his Liberal opposite number Tony Abbott. In the US, the high terrorism alert in Yemen has thrown the NSA's mass intelligence gathering programme into an interesting perspective as western nations scrambled to evacuate embassies and safeguard citizens earlier this week. The whistleblower Edward Snowden, meanwhile, has begun a 12-month asylum residency in Russia, much to the fury of the US. In the UK a row over the widespread use of minimal employee rights "zero hours" contracts is intensifying, while several big party donors have been rewarded with life peerages in the House of Lords. In Comment, Martin Kettle offers a thought-provoking view on why politics would be richer if our elected representatives sought more inspiration from the musical and literary worlds, while the Observer's Henry Porter looks ahead to next year's 100th anniversary of the first world war and its greater significance today. Our main feature in the Weekly Review is about the US government's "disposition matrix", an elaborately compiled global database of suspected terrorists who are targeted in drone strikes or captured. But how much of a threat do all those on the list really pose? In France, meanwhile, plans to extend a law banning public employees from displaying their religion have met with opposition from Muslims. With many of us (in the northern hemisphere at least) heading for the beach on holiday, Discovery asks how justified our fear of shark attacks really is. The Books section considers a major new biography of Karl Marx, and also tells the tale of how a promising debutante detective fiction writer was carelessly exposed as the worldwide bestselling author JK Rowling. Culture looks at the work of the celebrated architect Richard Rogers, the subject of a major new exhibition in London. Notes & Queries ponders whether more good news would actually be good news. We meet an American reader who discovered the Weekly while studying in Algeria. The moths are hatching out in Wenlock Edge, where Paul Evans has been taking notes. And in Sport, Guardian cricket correspondent Mike Selvey reports on how typical Manchester weather helped England somewhat fortunately retain the Ashes, despite a greatly improved performance by Australia. Would you like to change your delivery address? Your email address? Suspend delivery? You can manage your account online by clicking here. Are you a subscriber looking for our digital edition? If so, click here. That digital edition can also be viewed by subscribers on iPads, iPhones, Kindle Fires, Android tablets and smartphones. Log in on the device to the digital edition and the technology should take you to the correct format.