The Snowden Saga mobile game is inspired by the NSA-whistleblowing exploits of Edward Snowden With NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden having been granted temporary asylum in Russia, he's enjoying a break from running away from the US authorities. On mobile devices, it's a different story. Meet Snowden Saga – Escape from Den of Iniquity, the first mobile game inspired by Snowden's exploits. Launched as a free download for iPhone, iPad and Android, it's safe to say it takes some liberties with the real-life story. "Snowden Saga - Escape from Den of Iniquity is a spy action game about Snowden, an ex-secret service agent who got wrongly convicted of a crime he didn't commit," explains its App Store listing. "He has has escaped the jail with the help of some friends and now you take control of Snowden and help him escape the authorities that are following him, guide him through tricky paths changing gravity in a sci-fi world; don't forget to collect the top secret documents to get info on how to save himself as well as his country." The game is an endless-runner in the vein of Temple Run, complete with laser-door traps and the promise of "mind-blowing 3D visual effects" from its India-based developer Moong Labs, whose previous releases include Slap Thy Neighbor, Jump Monkey Jump and the keyword-stuffed Viking Rush – Clan Defenders' Glory Clash Chronicle. Is it any good? Let's just say based on The Guardian's play-test this morning, Snowden Saga seems unlikely to trouble the upper reaches of the App Store charts. Moong Labs has done well to get the game approved by Apple, though. The company has a track record of rejecting games based on real-world political hot potatoes, including the North Korea-themed Joyful Executions, Syria-based Endgame: Syria and border-control satire Smuggle Truck. Snowden Saga's sci-fi setting may have saved it from that fate, while its careful avoidance of saying which "authorities" are chasing its Snowden character will have eased it past Apple's App Store rule that "'Enemies' within the context of a game cannot solely target a specific race, culture, a real government or corporation, or any other real entity".