Proudly non-PC: Ukip MEP Godfrey Bloom. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian The paradox of political correctness There is no such thing as a reasonable amount of political correctness. That is because anyone who thinks it exists as an influential doctrine is convinced it has gone mad, while those who think the "political correctness gone mad" people are a bit mad do not identify themselves as politically correct. They are just trying not to sound like racists. So, for example, when a prominent member of Ukip refers to "Bongo Bongo Land", he is asserting his credentials as politically incorrect, a label he wears as a badge of honour. There are far more people who willingly think of themselves as non-PC than politically correct. The "PC brigade" has no official members. Thus, in Ukip terms, the correct thing to be is incorrect. And if the original political correctness, that no one claims to represent, went mad, the only meaningful version of political correctness is the new one that those who believed in the old political correctness think is sane, which is the same one that those who are alleged to be insanely politically correct think is mad. The rule, therefore, is that anyone who claims that political correctness has gone mad is probably right and quite mad. Diplomatic spats Barack Obama has pulled out of a visit to Russia because Moscow has granted temporary asylum to Edward Snowden, the CIA digital espionage whistleblower. This, in diplomatic terms, is a snub – the geo-strategic equivalent of Obama telling Vladimir Putin he's unfollowed him on Twitter. The important thing about a snub is that it is felt by the snubbee. The snubbee can sometimes affect not to feel the snub. This counter-snub makes the original snubber look like he is just having a sulk. In diplomatic terms, when you look like you are sulking you have lost. So Putin may pretend that he is unbothered. But the danger there is that the lack of retaliation is interpreted as looking chastened. So Putin may has to find the diplomatic equivalent of unfriending the US president on Facebook. To escalate from a snub is to break from protocol. A break from protocol can then be met with an unprecedented break from protocol, after which any deviation from diplomatic etiquette is an affront. The receiver of an affront should declare it an outrage. Then the exchange qualifies as a full-blown incident, at which point it may even be necessary to rattle sabres. To de-escalate from an incident one side should offer an olive branch, although it is customary for that to be rebuffed at first. Once the olive branch is accepted, feelers are put out, leading to overtures and eventually a thaw. Only once relations are thawing is it safe to start snubbing again. British sovereignty over Gibraltar Like the red phone box – to be cherished and preserved without question long after anyone can remember when it served a useful purpose. Keeping a low profile It transpires that a ruthless mafia boss has been living incognito in a west London suburb. For 19 years, Domenico Rancadore lived as Marc Skinner with his family in a semi-detached house in Uxbridge – the perfect cover for a Sicilian crime boss. The only better place in British society where a person can go about their business without attracting attention or causing any kind of stir is the frontbench of the Labour party. Dwindling panda numbers The expectation of a baby giant panda is the zoological equivalent of a royal pregnancy. It registers on the Prince George scale of reproductive news-worthiness below an heir to the throne but above the offspring of a B-List reality TV star. A giant panda born in the UK can expect to win the affections of the nation. The parents, on the other hand, are plainly benefit tourists who have come to the country for free fertility treatment and overstayed their visas, meaning they should contact the Home Office for help going home to China or face arrest.