Theresa May with her new consultant on staff honesty. Photograph: Matthew Lloyd/Getty Images • Now that PM Dave is riding high, we aren't hearing so much about Theresa May or her leadership credentials – which might be explained by her recent health issues, or because behind the scenes there's a lot needs doing. For they take a tough line on crime at the Home Office. Irksome to report, then, that according to an analysis undertaken by the department itself, 30 of its employees have been convicted of 37 serious criminal offences over the past five years. The list, unveiled in the Lords, revealed all sorts of shenanigans; breaches of immigration law, fraud, bribery, misconduct in public office, false accounting, criminal facilitation, data and computer offences, money laundering. Quite the rogues' gallery. If she wants to throw the book at lawbreakers, she won't have to throw it far. • Meanwhile, as Francis Maude prowls the corridors of Whitehall looking for mandarins he can put out to pasture, their understandable reaction is to keep their heads down. How to flush 'em out? Here's a wheeze circulated to staff by email on Thursday: "Tweet the Head of the Civil Service about your work, share a photo of a visit you've been on, or celebrate some great work you have been involved in using hashtag #CSUncovered and help Sir Bob Kerslake promote the amazing work we all do." Hardly a deluge so far. Safety in anonymity: only dim turkeys vote for Christmas. • Brotherly love is sometimes hard to find in the charity world and with the rivalry between the chief executives of the National Council for Voluntary Organisations (NCVO) and the Association of Chief Executives of Voluntary Organisations (ACEVO) one moves into Cain and Abel territory. But it's round two to the NCVO's Sir Stuart Etherington who seems to have got the upper hand over Sir Stephen Bubb of ACEVO. Bubb has been making waves saying charity hot shots should be paid the going rate, meaning £100,000 plus. In front of a Commons committee last year he and Etherington were involved in a public spat, with NCVO taking the prudent line. Now Etherington has set up an inquiry with the Charity Commission to draw up guidelines on senior pay. It seems likely to conclude that big money is unnecessary and Bubb is wrong. Still, things could be worse: ministers could start asking why the voluntary orgs need two membership organisations both led by well-paid knights, especially now that they share the same offices. One prays they won't. • We referenced the former Formula One champion James Hunt a couple of days ago. Didn't he once piddle on an aeroplane curtain, we asked. Reader Steven Burkeman gets in touch. Hunt was much more than that, he says. "During the South African apartheid years, I organised and chaired a discreet meeting in central London for wealthy individuals and foundations wanting to support black-led groups working for change there. The meeting had just started when the doorbell rang. A vaguely familiar-looking chap apologised for being late and asked if he could park his bike in the hall. It took me a while but eventually the penny dropped. Hunt was by then commentating on grand prix racing, alongside Murray Walker. He didn't want his commentaries broadcast in South Africa, and when they were, he channelled his fees towards groups struggling for change there." Gotta like that. • Finally, the Edward Snowden saga wends its tortuous way, winning him admirers and detractors in equal measure. Support can spring from unlikely quarters. This a pronouncement from Tunnels and Tunnelling. "Last month Edward Snowden, a former low-level NSA technician, revealed to the world what it already knew: that the shadowy arm of the world's most powerful government is keeping tabs on its citizens." It added: "The tunnelling industry can be dangerous for whistleblowers too. Why should anyone believe a future statement that the NSA has ended its intrusive surveillance? And why should anyone believe that high-profile projects would not, like any slighted government entity, try to save face (and further costs) first and foremost." So keep the faith, Edward Snowden: the tunnellers are with you. Twitter: @hugh_muir