The US financial regulator, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), has ordered Conrad Black to pay $4.1m (£2.6m) to compensate his former Chicago newspaper group and banned him from holding a US company directorship. The SEC's decision ends a lengthy legal wrangle over Black's dealings as the head of the Hollinger media empire that once included the Daily and Sunday Telegraph. It followed Black's appeal against an October 2012 SEC judgment that ordered him to pay $6.1 million (£3.9m) in restitution to the Chicago Newspaper Liquidation Corp, formerly known as the Sun-Times Media Group, which was the US successor to Hollinger. "In the circumstances, and given the correlation of forces and the defamation I endured, it is a very happy ending," Black said in an email quoted by the Chicago Tribune. He added: "The collapse of the onslaught against me speaks for itself." Black was released from a US prison in May 2012 after serving three years for fraud and obstruction of justice. He was found guilty in 2007 of conspiring with partner David Radler and other executives to siphon off millions of dollars from the disposal of newspapers. Hollinger once owned scores of titles, including the Chicago Sun-Times, the Jerusalem Post, and Canada's the National Post. The SEC deal clears the way for the Ontario Securities Commission, Canada's securities regulator, to pursue its own case against Black and two other former Hollinger executives. Meanwhile Black, now living in Toronto, remains as bombastic as ever and continues to deny that he was guilty of any crime. In a FoxBusiness.com interview, he said once again that the charges against him were nonsense. He is banned from the US, and when asked by interviewer Neil Cavuto what would happen should he fly into New York airport, Black replied: "I'd be the Snowden of the west" He was also critical of Sam Zell, the man who bought the Tribune media company and oversaw its slide into bankruptcy. "I have great respect for Sam," said Black, "but he loaded the company with an unconscionable amount of debt… I don't think he knew how to be a publisher." Sources: Chicago Tribune/Fox Business