Top eight stories on MediaGuardian Guardian journalist's partner detained at Heathrow airport for nine hours David Miranda, partner of Glenn Greenwald, the Guardian interviewer of whistleblower Edward Snowden, questioned under Terrorism Act NI could face corporate charges over hacking Metropolitan police investigation has interviewed 'very senior figures' from organisation now known as News UK BBC2 to air Germany's Generation War Dubbed a 'German Band of Brothers', series is groundbreaking, violent depiction of five friends during period 1941-1945 Murdoch buys 5% stake in Vice 5% stake in off-beat magazine sold to Rupert Murdoch's 21st Century Fox, allowing it to expand into Europe and India Breaking Bad creator Vince Gilligan: 'How long can anyone stay at the top?' Why viewers still identify with Walter White, his plans for a Saul Goodman spin-off – and why it's time to end the hit series now Condé Nast's style bible is still in Vogue Josh Halliday: Digital growth may be embryonic, but its luxury publications continue to show resilience to magazine downturn Magazine ABCs show scale of gloom David Hepworth: Publishers must look to digital growth and how some of the more traditional titles have managed to contain circulation losses BBC Panorama camera causes bomb alert Corporation faces £5,000 terror scare bill after package posted from BBC Northern Ireland to Salford HQ was deemed suspicious Top comment on MediaGuardian Why Condé Nast's style bible is still in Vogue Digital growth may be embryonic, but its luxury publications continue to show resilience to magazine downturn Today's headlines The Guardian Guardian journalist's partner held under UK terrorism act. P1, P2 Fringe benefits: writers seek Edinburgh's bigger stages. P5 'German Band of Brothers' to air on BBC2. P11 Obituary: Arline Usden. P27 MediaGuardian: Magazines have lost their gloss but there are some shining examples, says David Hepworth. P27 MediaGuardian: Condé Nast's style bible is still in Vogue. P28 MediaGuardian interview: Vince Gilligan. P29 MediaGuardian: Media Monkey's Diary. P28 Daily Telegraph Daytime sex is okay on the radio, insists BBC. P1 Dame Helen fronts new M&S campaign. P5 BT Sport underwhelms on its Premier League debut. Business P3 Google tries to sidestep UK lawsuit over iPhone privacy breaches. Business P3 Financial Times What LinkedIn should learn from the Girl Guides. P10 BT kicks off Premier League coverage with 764,000 viewers. P13 The Times Tesco adds tablet to its wishlist for Christmas. P35 The Independent Murdoch buys slice of Vice. P12 NBC's $250m Premier League package Britain goes live with local TV. P51 Kevin Spacey's Edinburgh outing is online marker. P51 The Sun appoints Stig Abell as managing editor. P51 i Local TV revolution will be televised – and it's starting in Grimsby. P41 Challenges ahead for Stig Abell at the Sun. P41 Kevin Spacey spies a new way to reap rewards. P41 Danny Rogers: 'Publicom' merger is just the start. P41 STV set for weaker profits. P42 Vice builds global reach in 5% sale to Fox. P43 Wall Street Journal Europe NSA denies wilful privacy infringement. P7 Daily Mail TV star in super-injunction case 'had sex with girl of 15'. P3 Jeremy Paxman: I look like Albert Steptoe in my beard. P10 BBC boss said Colin Firth wasn't handsome enough to pay Mr Darcy. P30 Daily Express Downton Abbey stars in two-year contracts. P3 The Sun Coronation Street's Chris Fountain pictured after being unmasked as explicit rapper. P9 Bobbi Houston pulls out of Celebrity Big Brother. TV Biz, P1 Daily Mirror Jeremy Paxman: my beard makes me look like Albert Steptoe. P11 Daily Star Simon Cowell flies back to face the music. P6 Fans backlash fear on rape rap Chris Fountain. P9 Go to MediaGuardian