It may be unsurprising that David Miranda's arrest was The Guardian splash today. He is, after all, the partner of a Guardian journalist, Glenn Greenwald. But his extraordinary nine-hour detention under schedule 7 of the Terrorism Act was surely worthy of big coverage elsewhere. Is it not obvious that it amounts to an attack on press freedom let alone an abuse of the man's human rights? The story got full measure on radio and TV news bulletins last night and this morning. So how did the rest of the British press cover this major story? I accept that it broke late. Metro's website story (with a SEO-savvy headline "Edward Snowden journalist's partner detained under terror laws") was timed at 9.52pm. That was certainly not too late, however, to prevent newspaper coverage. Well done therefore to the Daily Telegraph, which managed to get a mention in print from its second edition onwards (with a goodly online show too). The tribute is qualified, however, because the paper's print version was tucked away as a bottom-of-page two-column item on page 4, "Reporter's partner detained at Heathrow." I couldn't find it in print in The Independent, but the paper's website gave it a big show. There was a paragraph in i's page 2. By contrast, there was nothing in the former paper of record, The Times. And it wasn't even on its website as far as I could see. The Daily Mail restricted its coverage to its website, "Brazilian fury as partner of journalist who reported Edward Snowden's spying revelations is detained at Heathrow airport for nine hours under anti-terrorism laws". There was nothing in the Daily Express, Daily Star, Daily Mirror, The Sun and the Financial Times. This was a remarkable oversight by newspapers that have made so much of journalistic freedom throughout the Leveson saga. Is it not a story when a journalist's partner is arrested? Or is this yet more evidence of an anti-Guardian agenda? It reminds me that in June I wrote a blogpost headlined "Edward Snowden spoke, so why did the British press turn a deaf ear?" Edward Snowden is an heroic whistleblower. The journalist who wrote his story, Glenn Greenwald, was responsible for breaking one of the world's greatest exclusives. Should we journalists, as a community, not be rallying to their cause rather than looking the other way?