1.54pm BST The government is already planning to change the way schedule 7 of the Terrorism Act (see 12.48pm) operates. But on the World at One David Anderson QC, the government's independent reviewer of terrorist legislation, suggested that reform should go even further. Here are the main points. • Anderson suggested further "safeguards" needed to be introduced to prevent the Terrorism Act being abused. He identified two possible reforms which he said he hoped MPs would consider when they debated the legislation in the autumn. First, the Act could be changed to stop police detaining people under schedule 7 (as they can now) when they do not suspect someone of being a terrorist. It seems to me there is a question to be answered about whether it should possible to detain somebody, to keep them for six hours, to download their mobile phone, without the need for any suspicion at all. I hope at least it is something that parliament will look at. Second, new rules could be introduced controlling how the police can seize data under the Act. What sort of safeguards do you have? When are those data going to be removed? How long are they going to be retained by the police? ... I think there is certainly room for more safeguards. • He said other proposed changes to the schedule 7 power were already being introduced as a result of a review that he recommended. Under these proposed changed, the police will be allowed to detain people for up to six hours, instead of up to nine hours, and after one hour anyone detained will have access to a lawyer. "I have not met anyone who has had a word to say against the changes," he said. They would "rein in some of the more extreme aspects of the power", he said. But these changes "don't perhaps go right to the basics", he said. • He confirmed that he had asked for a briefing on the detention of David Miranda. But he would not comment on this rights and wrongs of this specific case. • But he said that holding someone for up to nine hours under schedule 7 was highly unusual. What I can do is look across the whole range of port activity. We see 200m or so port users every year. Of those, [60,000] or 70,000 are examined under this schedule 7 stop and only 40 of those are kept for longer than six hours. You can see what an unusual case this was if it is correct Mr Miranda was held right up to the nine hour limit. • He said schedule 7 should not be abandoned entirely. This is a useful power. It does capture terrorists. It does disrupt terrorists. And it is very important that in some form it should continue to exist. David Anderson QC Photograph: /BBC News Updated at 5.01pm BST