Glenn Greenwald (right) and his partner, David Miranda, who was held by UK authorities at Heathrow aiport. Photograph: Glenn Greenwald The UK's terrorism legislation watchdog has called for a massive overhaul of its detention laws following the detention at Heathrow airport of David Miranda, the partner of Guardian journalist Glenn Greenwald. Miranda was detained under schedule seven of Britain's Terrorism Act 2000 and held for almost nine hours – the maximum time allowable before further authority is required. Under the laws, Miranda's electronic equipment, including laptop and memory sticks, were confiscated. Amnesty International criticised the action, labeling the detention of Miranda an abuse of power and "unwarranted revenge tactics" based solely on his relationship with Greenwald, the journalist who broke most of the NSA revelations from whistleblower Edward Snowden. Britain's independent monitor of terrorism legislation, David Anderson, said that more than 60,000 people had been detained in the UK under schedule seven, but less than 40 were held for more than six hours. In the post-9/11 period many nations enacted anti-terror legislation which gave authorities wider powers to prevent or investigate further attacks. While Australian legislation varies in detail and severity from state to state, there are three prominent components of federal legislation introduced since the September 11 attacks relating to the detention and questioning of Australians under anti-terror legislation. Control orders A control order can prevent a person being in or leaving a certain area or associating with specific people, stop them from using a specific item or accessing forms of technology and enforce the wearing of a tracking device. The order can last for a maximum of six months for subjects over the age of 18 and a maximum of three months for those aged 16-18. The Australian federal police can apply to the attorney general for a control order against a person if "it substantially helps prevent a terrorist attack" or if the person has trained with a listed terrorist association. Breach of a control order can attract a penalty of up to five years' imprisonment. According to the Attorney General's Department, only two control orders have ever been issued. Preventative detention orders A person can be held by police under a preventative detention order (PDO) for up to a maximum of 14 days under state laws (48 hours under commonwealth laws). A PDO can be authorised on the suspicion that a person will commit a terrorist act, has done or will do something in preparation for a terrorist act, or possesses something or engages with someone connected to that preparation. Disclosing the existence of a preventative detention order is a jailable offence, and any contact with a lawyer is monitored by police, according to the Australian human rights commission. Detainees are allowed to alert necessary people that they are safe but unable to be contacted for the time being. They are not allowed to disclose that they are subject to the PDO, that they are being detained or for how long. Breaches can attract up to five years imprisonment. No PDOs were made their inception to September 2012, according to the Law Council of Australia. Detention by Asio The Australian security intelligence organisation (Asio) can detain and question a person for up to seven days with a warrant from a federal judge or magistrate. The attorney general must give consent for the issuing of the warrant. Within that seven days the detainee can be subject to a maximum of 24 hours of questioning. The detainee is permitted a lawyer, must answer all questions and surrender their passport. They are not allowed to tell anyone they have been questioned by Asio while the warrant is under way or for two years after, without permission. A breach of any of these conditions has a penalty of up to five years in jail. Since enacted, Asio has rarely used a questioning warrant or a detain and question warrant.