Link to video: Greenwald's partner David Miranda on his detention under terror laws Labour has stepped up the pressure on the government to give a full explanation of the nine-hour detention of David Miranda by demanding a statement from the home secretary, Theresa May, in light of a detailed response from the White House. As a leading Liberal Democrat criticised the "terribly alarming" detention of the partner of the Guardian journalist Glenn Greenwald, the shadow home secretary, Yvette Cooper, said the Home Office could no longer dismiss questions about the matter. Cooper said: "If the White House knew about the decision to detain David Miranda at Heathrow, surely the home secretary knew too? It isn't good enough for the Home Office to dismiss this as a matter for the police. "The White House have made clear it was a decision by the British government and the police have said it was a detailed decision-making process reviewed throughout. Given the sensitivity of this operation and the continued questions about the use of terrorism legislation in this case, Theresa May cannot simply refer this to the police." Downing Street and the Home Office have declined to answer questions about the detention of Miranda on the grounds that it was an operational police matter. David Davis, the former shadow home secretary, said this position was no longer tenable after the White House said US authorities were given a "heads-up" by Britain before Miranda was detained. In her statement Cooper added: "The home secretary needs to tell us whether she or the prime minister were informed or involved in this decision. Is it really possible that the American president was told what was happening but the British prime minister wasn't? The government needs to explain who authorised the use of terrorism legislation in this case and what the justification was." Cooper spoke out after the Liberal Democrat home affairs spokesman, Julian Huppert, said he was concerned about "political interference" in the police's use of anti-terror laws to hold Miranda. He said it looked like the Guardian was "being victimised for publishing stories" and called on the government to clarify exactly who knew about the decision to take Miranda into custody at Heathrow airport on Sunday. The UK's anti-terrorism legislation watchdog is due to meet police on Tuesday, after calling for an overhaul of the laws that allowed police to confiscate Miranda's electronic equipment. Miranda lives in Rio de Janeiro with Greenwald, who has written a series of stories for the Guardian revealing mass surveillance programmes by the NSA. He was returning to their home from Berlin when he was stopped at Heathrow under schedule 7 of the Terrorism Act 2000, allowing officials to take away his mobile phone, laptop, camera, memory sticks, DVDs and games consoles. During his trip to Berlin, Miranda met Laura Poitras, the US film-maker who has been working with Greenwald and the Guardian, which paid for his flights. Miranda is not a Guardian employee but often assists Greenwald in his work. Huppert said the public needed to understand "who was behind this, who knew about it, who authorised it". "It's one thing if it was a police decision but if there was political interference that's another matter," he said. "If the US knew, who else knew? Did the home secretary give this her blessing? If it was purely a police decision, it should be looked at through the IPCC [Independent Police Complaints Commission]. But there will definitely be questions in parliament about who authorised [it]." Huppert said he would personally ask May to explain what she knew when the House of Commons returns from its summer break next month. "This case itself is awful. It looks like the Guardian is being victimised for publishing these stories about surveillance. It's clearly not right," he said. "But in many ways it is worse for other people who wouldn't have access to the same resources. Lots of people are stopped every year with very little grounds for it." David Anderson QC, the independent reviewer of terrorism legislation, has described the detention as unusual and said decisions about proportionality were not ultimately for the police. He told Radio 4's The World at One on Monday: "The police, I'm sure, do their best. But at the end of the day there is the Independent Police Complaints Commission, which can look into the exercise of this power, there are the courts and there is my function." The Metropolitan police issued a statement in which it said the detention was "legally and procedurally sound". The statement said: "The procedure was reviewed throughout to ensure the examination was both necessary and proportionate." Keith Vaz, the Labour chairman of the Commons home affairs committee, has already written to the Metropolitan police commissioner, Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe, to ask him who took the decision to detain Miranda. Vaz said his committee would examine the use of the law used as part of an inquiry into terrorism. "This is an extraordinary twist to an already complex story. It is right that the police have these powers but it is important that they are used appropriately," he said.