What do bloody clashes on the streets of Cairo have in common with anti-fracking protests against the Cuadrilla exploration rig in rural West Sussex? At a stretch, what links the Battle of Balcombe, which so outrages Tory Fleet Street, with harassment of the Guardian over Edward Snowden's data-mining disclosures? In terms of substance, not a lot connects a constitutional battle for the Egyptian presidency, an environmental tussle in a prosperous corner of Britain and a debate over national security, how best to protect it and at what cost to the privacy of citizens. But in another sense, all three issues are about security and the role of the state in arbitrating sharply conflicting visions and values, in each of which it is not a neutral nightwatchman but an active player. The Guardian's national security reporters – Team Greenwald – need no help from me, certainly not when the British and American governments are inadvertently doing so much to promote the case the whistleblower Snowden first made in June: that the law provides inadequate protection against fast-evolving intercept technologies, which are in any case being abused in Maryland and Gloucestershire, by the NSA and GCHQ. But what about Balcombe and its symbolic role as the village that may hold the key – if fracking's champions are to be believed – to releasing Britain from the looming energy gap, from higher energy prices and from over-reliance on fuel imports from countries whose police make those who detained David Miranda at Heathrow look like Quakers? It's easy to make fun of the protesters who have gathered in ever-larger numbers at Balcombe for this week's protest. A combination of Bianca Jagger, Dame Vivienne Westwood, the former Playboy model Marina Pepper and the confrontational No Dash for Gas crowd (a bit more macho and frightening) has allowed the Telegraph and Mail to thunder against the police caving in to "mob rule". Though from 50 miles away, where I type, it sounds a bit Ealing comedy too. Protests are spreading – check the live blog. On the question of principle, those who would deny the protesters the right to challenge Cuadrilla and its kind risk aligning themselves with the sort of attitude that – in extremity – justifies the military government of Egypt's violent response when confronted with a noisy and uncompromising street demonstration by a minority, the Muslim Brotherhood's militant tendency. Ditto those – read the Tory MP Ben Wallace on Twitter – who are happy to assert that Snowden's revelations threaten our security, and the authorities are therefore right to harass him, Greenwald and their friends and contacts. Yet authority's reassurances have been exposed as less-than watertight since June. Heavy-handed and disprortionate response, at which the Obama administration is so good, doesn't help its case. Public opinion is shifting the Guardian's way – and that's not something I feel able to write every week. But protesters and whistleblowers have wider obligations, too. I happen to think Snowden has discharged his obligations with more wisdom and grace than did Julian Assange. I also think that Mohamed Morsi, who only narrowly won last year's election against an unattractive rival, governed Egypt unwisely, though I can see his problem. Egyptians on both sides of the secular/Islamist chasm, so Middle East veterans like the Guardian's Ian Black report, still see politics as a zero-sum, winner-take-all game (as do some here), rather than as the truly heroic art of the possible. Compromise and accommodation are needed, but are not remotely in view. In Balcombe it is all but certain that Cuadrilla's decision to suspend drilling while the protest is on is merely a tactical retreat, as is the soft policing that outrages armchair coppers in Fleet Street. So "we're winning" talk by protesters is both premature and foolish. Surely veterans of the Occupy movement's camp outside St Paul's, or of the Travellers' battle at Dale Farm in Essex, and now those in Balcombe must realise that this will now become a tactical battle for public opinion. Fiona Harvey detects a shift in public opinion, so the Mail and Telegraph may be on the wrong foot with their readers. They HATE that. Neither should protesters overplay their hand, as some young men will be keen to do. Monday's arrests will not be the last. How both sides behave matters. As successive court cases confirm, the police have infiltrated, targeted and abused protest groups. Balcombe's residents, understandably alarmed at the prospect of living with oil or gas wells, seem to be against Cuadrilla. But the parish council chairman wrote to the newly arriving protesters last week asking them to behave or go home (and to glue themselves to the doors of the PR firm Bell Pottinger?) So much for tactics. With the tantalising prospect of vast sums of (relatively) clean gas to be fracked from beneath Britain's energy-hungry feet, the issue is not going to go away. Nor should it. After a slow start, America has revolutionised its energy prices and needs via fracking. But the US is a very big country – Britain is smaller than Idaho – and famously careless of its use-it-and-throw-it-away environment. Canada's tar-sands oil extraction has proved a lucrative but scary business. Under François Hollande, whose instincts are far from deft, France (just twice the size of Britain and the same size as Texas) has swung the other way, banning fracking exploration. It has been hobbled by a relative lack of fossil fuel since the industrial revolution, hence its rapid move to nuclear power, the option that Germany's Angela Merkel, normally so cautious, is now abandoning at speed. Tricky, isn't it? Today's Guardian G2 carries a stimulating examination of the case for and against fracking by the paper's John Vidal. Though it is weighted against fracking, as you would expect from an environmental reporter (to dismiss the science writer Matt Ridley as a mere viscount and failed banker is a little mean), it touches all relevant bases. They include earthquakes, clean water, water shortages (fracking needs lots of the stuff), rural despoilation, energy security (even the Greens don't trust Mr Putin or the Saudis), climate change, wildlife, jobs and the wider economic benefits, which the frackers dangle before suspicious rural communities rich and poor. MPs on all sides – and councils, too – want their constituents to be bought off with cash grants and percentage shares. Wise or shortsighted? Perhaps Orkney islanders can advise us. In his weekly column, George Monbiot has a crack at Balcombe's existential crisis – and emerges with a characteristically ingenious explanation. Among other worries, he frets (quite rightly) that biogas/methane options will be neglected as fracked gas becomes the easy, magic-wand solution for policymakers; likewise wind power. David Cameron and George Osborne are cheerleaders for the frackers in ways they do not employ for renewables, so the state is a partisan player. Why do they do it, asks Monbiot. Not because it's primarily about money (that's progress, George) or even energy security, but because politicians and business leaders, especially in the extractive industries, love macho solutions to problems. Oil/gas drilling is one such ("like war, the real deal"), he suggests. It's a good point, though you could also plausibly make it against the HS2 rail project, which I imagine G Monbiot supports, as he nowadays supports nuclear as a necessary part of a diversified energy mix. Don't forget, Britain has a projected energy gap out there somewhere. If we shiver in 2025, don't expect green campaigners to put their hands up and say, "Whoops, we were wrong, too. "They'll be busy fundraising for some other campaign. That's how campaigns are. I've read many articles making the case for and against fracking. All sorts of official bodies, ranging from the Environment Agency to the Commons select committee and (with anti-cowboy reservations) the Church of England, have declared fracking safe and of great potential benefit; so does the industry. And climate-change sceptics including the ex-editors Charles Moore and Dominic Lawson routinely write in its favour (they live in Sussex, too!) It's a very old technology being subjected to new scare stories, some add. That's my hunch, too. There is often something both reactionary and nostaglic about green thinking. But persuasive doubts persist, and voters feel they have been let down or confused too often by the potent mix of science, politics and quasi-religious fervour on both sides. That's the bottom line, really. On issues like fracking, data-mining and HS2, for instance, people no longer trust experts, even when – MMR jabs or the perils of smoking – they should. Both sides will have to work a lot harder to make their case. Honestly and peacefully is best. No scare stories, broken heads or riots, please. The battle isn't won in Balcombe, but its TV pictures will become part of the debate we should all engage with.