Shaken by the extent of the criticism of Miranda's detention, the Home Office has mounted a robust defence Photograph: Clara Molden/PA "Laws designed for terrorism should be used for terrorism", said David Anderson QC, the independent reviewer of terrorism legislation. He was referring to the government's decision to detain David Miranda, partner of the Guardian journalist, Glenn Greenwald, who broke stories of mass surveillance by the NSA and GCHQ. Shaken by the extent of the criticism of Miranda's detention at Heathrow airport for nine hours — the maximum allowed under the no doubt intentionally obscure and strange schedule 7 of the 2000 Terrorism Act — the Home Office on Tuesday decided to mount a robust defence. "The government and the police have a duty to protect the public and our national security", said a spokesperson. "If the police believe that an individual is in possession of highly sensitive stolen information that would help terrorism, then they should act and the law provides them with a framework to do that." There is no evidence that terrorists would have got hold of any material Miranda might have had in his possession. And, as Alan Rusbridger, the Guardian's editor, noted in a BBC interview on Tuesday, once you start conflating terrorism and journalism as a country, you are in some trouble. The US has already gone down that line. After filming in Iraq about the effects of the invasion on the country's citizens in a way the US authorities did not appreciate, Laura Poitras — the US documentary maker who worked with Greenwald and the US whistleblower, Edward Snowden, — found out in 2006 that her tickets on domestic flights were marked "SSSS" – Secondary Security Screening Selection. She faced extra scrutiny at airports and was questioned at airports on more than 40 occasions. The White House says that British officials gave Washington the "heads up" on Miranda's detention. There is little doubt it passed on everything the British learned from Miranda's questioning and any material he had with him. The White House denied it was involved in Miranda's detention. It did not need to be - any more than it was involved in the Thatcher government's decision in 1984 to ban trade unions at GCHQ. There is nothing more that elements in the more secret parts of the British government — any British government — like than to ingratiate themselves with the US. Another important point in this saga must be emphasised. The Guardian has held back a lot of information on national security grounds — something Whitehall officials have acknowledged. I must be among many journalists who have written extensively about defence, security, and intelligence, matters and held back lots of information which, if revealed, could be of use to terrorists and other criminals. Judging by the government's recent actions, and its defence of them, we too could be held for questioning at ports or airports on a whim. In its attempt to intimidate journalists and appease Washington, the government is going down a dangerous, counterproductive, path. It serves only to encourage distrust of the government's motives, even more so since what the government is trying to cover up is the fast expanding capability of its intelligence agencies to spy with impunity on its own citizens - in case some time in the future they might conceivably pose some kind of threat to society. And as journalists agree to indulge in self-censorship in the genuine interests of national security, Whitehall and its intelligence agencies continue to withhold information to protect themselves from embarrassment. They do so, as they did on Monday in response to a question prompted by the release in Washington of official documents confirming US and British involvement in a coup that toppled the nationalist, democratically-elected, Iranian prime minister, Mohammad Mossadeq, sixty years ago, in 1953. Invited to respond, Whitehall officials came back with the stock phrase they deploy in response to questions from journalists about the activities of the security and intelligence agencies. They could "neither confirm nor deny" Britain's involvement in the coup, they said.