NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden. Photograph: the Guardian Amnesty International has said the pressure exerted on the Guardian by UK authorities to destroy hard drives containing material from the NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden is a threat to freedom of expression, and marks a "sinister turn of events". The Guardian editor-in-chief, Alan Rusbridger, wrote on Monday that two GCHQ security experts visited the Guardian on 20 July and oversaw the destruction of hard drives containing copies of information provided to the newspaper by the whistleblower. Rusbridger wrote that the destruction of the hard drives followed meetings with a "senior government official claiming to represent the views of the prime minister" who had demanded the destruction or return of the material. Tawanda Hondora, the deputy director of law and policy at Amnesty International, said: "Insisting that the Guardian destroy information received from a whistleblower is a sinister turn of events. "This is an example of the government trying to undermine press freedoms. It also seriously undermines the right of the public to know what governments do with their personal and private information. If confirmed, these actions expose the UK's hypocrisy as it pushes for freedom of expression overseas." Amnesty has called for the UK government to "explain its actions and publicly affirm its commitment to the rule of law, freedom of expression and the independence of media". It has also called for an inquiry into who ordered the action. "Using strongarm tactics to try to silence media outlets and reports that divulge information relating to Prism [the US surveillance programme revealed by the Guardian through Snowden's leaks] and other surveillance efforts, is clearly against the public interest," Hondora said. Rusbridger said that the destruction of the hard drives was a "peculiarly pointless piece of symbolism" as he had already told UK authorities that other copies of the files existed outside the country and that their destruction would not prevent the Guardian from reporting on the Snowden documents from America or Brazil, where the Guardian's Glenn Greenwald, the reporter who broke the story, is based. The revelations that GCHQ had overseen the destruction of the hard drives followed the detention of David Miranda, Greenwald's partner, at Heathrow airport under schedule 7 of the Terrorism Act 2000. Miranda was held in transit under the act for almost nine hours and had a number of his possessions confiscated by officers under the act. Miranda's lawyers have written to the Home Office demanding the confiscated items be returned.