Evan Davis was interviewing Sir Malcolm Rifkind on the Today programme and he was very good. Before the interview started, Davis suggested that the detention of David Miranda for almost nine hours at Heathrow had some parallels with the case of Damian Green, the Conservative then shadow immigration minister who was arrested by counter-terrorism police in 2008. Green was also detained for nine hours. He had received leaked Home Office documents, and at the time officials argued that if someone in the Home Office was leaking information, then potentially national security was at risk. At the time Conservative MPs were furious, no threat to national security was ever established and Green and the official who leaked information to him were never charged. At the start of his interview Sir Malcolm Rifkind, the Conservative former foreign secretary who now chairs the intelligence and security committee, took issue with this comparison. He said the David Miranda case was "quite different". But Davis did not accept that. Here's how the rest of the interview went. I'm posting a transcript because I think it's worth reading in full. ED: Sorry, the point about that was at the time it was said it was a national security issue. So the question there was one of trust. MR: Absolutely. And it wasn't. ED: And it may be or may not be now. But how do we know and who do we trust to tell us that? MR: I was going to try and respond to that. Immigration matters clearly was not a matter of national security. The question of whether the Terrorism Act should have been used in the case of Mr Miranda is a sensitive issue and it is one that deserves proper investigation. But do remember, this was not about - as you've twice mentioned in your programme - embarrassment to the government. The documents which Snowden stole from the National Security Agency are documents, some of which deal with how the intelligence agencies get access to terrorist information through interception of mail or phone messages and so forth. That is something potentially relevant to terrorism. And therefore it's not questions of embarrassment to government. ED: You are very, very informed on this. Have you seen anything the Guardian has published, or put into the public domain, or indeed Edward Snowden, through the Guardian or other sources, that would be said to comprise a threat to national security in this country. MR: Oh, I think there's no question - and I'm not specifically talking about the Guardian - the various press reports of some of the Snowden leaks, what Snowden has given to various newspapers, in the US and the UK, gave information about the way in which the intelligence agencies are able to access emails or telephone calls by people they suspect are terrorists. There are procedures that are much more sophisticated than perhaps were previously understood. And terrorists, some of whom are very smart people, will have picked up that information and will have responded accordingly, and potentially made it more difficult to get access to that information. ED: Aren't you then saying that the core revelation, that they are monitoring more than anyone had previously understood, that core revelation is itself useful to terrorists ... But the authorities have welcomed all of this as opening a debate. MR: Let me qualify that. I'm not saying that every leak of every bit of information held by an intelligence agency will help terrorists. That would be a very exaggerated claim and it would not be one that would be justified. What I am saying is that neither Mr Snowden nor the editor of the Guardian nor the editor or any other newspaper is in a position to necessarily judge whether the release of top secret information may have a significant relevance in the battle against terrorism. These are very, very sensitive issues. Sometimes you may think, quite genuinely think, that you can release a document and it is not going to be of any assistance to terrorists when in fact you might be wrong. That's simply a question of your inability to judge if you are a newspaper editor or a journalist, as opposed to somebody involved in the intelligence work that has to be done. ED: And that takes us back to the issue of trust, because we can't judge, as you say, whether it is going to be useful to terrorists. So we need someone to somebody who we can trust to say, look, this is a national security issue, please don't publish it. The Guardian has been in contact with the authorities, that has emerged in the last few days. Alan Rusbridger says it's important, because these are very sensitive documents, to have a channel of communication with the authorities. And so can we trust the authorities? And what the Damian Green issue showed is that perhaps you can't, because they will always say national security, if it's embarrassing, whether it is national security or not. MR: I think Mr Rusbridger, in the article he wrote yesterday about the destruction of his hard disk, is on relatively weak ground. He clearly did not dispute that he had no legal right to possess the files or the documents that were being discussed. ED: Nor did Damian Green. MR: Hold on a moment. The question was whether he handed them back to the government or whether they were destroyed, and he chose the latter option. Now clearly, if he thought that what he was doing was perfectly lawful, that he was perfectly entitled to have these documents, he would have told the cabinet secretary or whoever it was to go and get lost, and ‘take me to court if you don’t like what I’m doing’. But he didn’t do that. He knew perfectly well that if you have in your possession documents which were originally stolen, you’re on pretty dodgy ground. ED: Well, you're not, are you? It's an accepted fact in this country that leaked documents - you can always call them 'stolen', it's a very loaded word - but Damian Green had stolen documents from the Home Office, didn't he? He did not steal them, but he had stolen documents. What is the difference? MR: Hold on a moment. We are talking about documents which were official secrets, which were classified as official secrets, both in the US and in the UK, and Mr Rusbridger clearly knew that. He knew that he had no lawful authority to possess these documents. And that is why he, at the end of the day, cooperated and destroyed the information that he had. GCHQ - I don't know yet, we will find this out - if GCHQ were in his basement supervising this, well clearly he must have invited them in, because they had no lawful authority to come in without his invitation. ED: He has explained all of that by the way .... Explain maybe why GCHQ waste their own officials' time watching over the destruction of one computer that contains these documents when there are other copies elsewhere? MR: Well, they may have been told by Mr Rusbridger that there are other copies elsewhere. They only have his word for that. As far as they were concerned, there was a top secret document which the Guardian had in their possession. They wanted that back or they wanted that destroyed. The fact that Mr Rusbridger was claiming - he may be right, we don't know that, nobody else knows that - the fact that he was claiming that the documents also existed elsewhere in another country, why should that be taken automatically as evidence of that fact. You can't take these risks when you are dealing with matters of such importance from a national security point of view. I'll post some thoughts on this in a moment.