Ed Miliband: time for another holiday? Photograph: Andy Rain/EPA John Prescott: The trouble with Ed is that he's just a wee bit useless. Labour party: Pots and kettles … Maurice Glasman: I really, really like Ed. But he is useless. The rest of Milidee's friends: We really like Ed, too. But he is totally useless. Milidee: I'm going to go among the people to spread the Labour message. Everyone: What's that? Milidee: I'm not entirely sure. Labour party: You were doing better when you were on holiday. Cameron: Nothing is going to spoil my summer holiday … Everyone: So we've noticed. You seem to be on your fourth already. Cameron: Except my back. It's seized up. I've had to cancel my annual stag shoot and can hardly get out of bed. Tory party treasurer: That's given me an idea. We could charge lobbyists a fortune at the Tory conference to come to your room. £100K to chat to you in the bath and £200k to join you in bed? Clegg: I'll pay that. I haven't seen you for ages, Daddy. Tory party: Run along, pint-size. You're history … David Miranda: Is this the UK? Border control: Not as far as you're concerned, terrorist scum. Miranda: What are you on about? Border control: You know very well. You're in league with that al-Qaida suspect Glenn Greenwald. Now hand over your PlayStation. Everyone: This doesn't sound right … Downing Street spokesperson: Calm down. Everyone's got their wires just a teeny-weeny bit crossed. Entre nous, Heathrow was acting on instructions from the US. The US: Bollocks. We never said anything about detaining that commie. Downing Street spokesperson: Is that you, Dave? It's all going tits up. You might need to do something. Cameron: I am doing something. I'm having a cream tea. Get Theresa to sort it out. May: I have it on the highest authority that every terror cell is planning to use Edward Snowden's revelations to blow up Britain. Everyone: That sounds unlikely. May: Well, it's true. Got it? Good. And Guardian – you can smash up all your computers. Guardian: If you insist. You do realise we have all the data backed up elsewhere? May: You're kidding? No one told me terrorism was so advanced. We're doomed. We're all doomed.