NSA revelations: Barack Obama has acknowledged there needs to be a debate about balancing national security with privacy interests. Photograph: Jacquelyn Martin/AP From the moment the first story revealing sweeping surveillance of domestic phone records by the National Security Agency appeared in early June, the Guardian ignited a storm of public and political debate in the US that has been noticeably absent in the UK response to similar revelations about GCHQ spying. Within hours, former vice-president Al Gore declared this "secret blanket surveillance [was] obscenely outrageous", setting the tone for weeks of mounting criticism from both left and right and a series of follow-up investigations that have forced the administration to consider major reforms. Leaked documents detailing the bulk collection of phone records were followed the next day by stories in the Guardian and the Washington Post exposing the Prism programme aimed at intercepting overseas internet traffic . Despite initial denials of involvement from technology companies, Prism has subsequently been shown to be the tip of an iceberg that encompasses the digital communications of millions of Americans and foreigners. Though condemning the leaks by NSA contractor Edward Snowden upon which these and dozens more stories were based, Barack Obama was quick to acknowledge that the debate over balancing national security with privacy interests was a necessary one. "I welcome this debate. And I think it's healthy for our democracy," he said on 7 June. "I think that's good that we're having this discussion." Republicans quickly weighed in too, including Jim Sensenbrenner, the author of the Patriot Act, which he felt had been abused by the administration to allow it to skirt around constitutional privacy protections. Senate intelligence committee members Ron Wyden and Mark Udall were particularly angered by evidence provided by Snowden that Congress had been kept in the dark about the proliferation of the surveillance state. Obama's top security official, director of national intelligence James Clapper, was forced to apologise for previously misleading Congress about the extent of the NSA's domestic surveillance activities and will have to testify before intelligence committee members to explain himself. As saturation media coverage across US television networks, newspapers and websites dominated the news agenda through June and July, the White House was forced to modify its defence of the programmes and Congress prepared to act. On 24 July, more than 200 Congressmen voted in favour of legislation to ban the bulk collection of US telephone records, a narrowly-defeated bill that shocked defenders of the NSA and united libertarians on the right with liberals on the left. Michigan Republican Justin Amash, said he introduced his amendment to the annual Defence Department appropriations bill to "defend the fourth amendment, to defend the privacy of each and every American". A further 11 legislative attempts at reform and improved oversight are expected to dominate Capitol Hill when lawmakers return in September, with some sort of united response seen as inevitable. In response Obama spent his last major press conference of the summer outlining plans to introduce a new review of NSA procedures and the court system that was meant to oversee them. "I believe it is important to take stock of how technological advances alter the environment in which we conduct our intelligence mission," he explained. The White House was also forced to play down suggestions that Clapper would lead the process, such is the lack of trust. One reason the White House reaction has been forced to keep evolving its response to the Snowden leaks is that much of the mainstream media has vigorously reported the revelations by the Guardian and Washington Post and often pursued separate investigations of its own. Just this week, the conservative-leaning Wall Street Journal published claims from NSA insiders that it was able to access 75 per cent of US internet traffic. Of course, none of this means anyone in the White House is happy with Snowden. Despite insisting he wouldn't be "scrambling jets" or burning "political capital" to capture the former NSA-contractor, Obama asked vice president Joe Biden to lean on Ecuador when it looked like it might offer asylum and stood by as NATO allies diverted a Bolivian presidential plane thought to be smuggling Snowden out of Russia. Cancelling a planned bilateral summit with President Putin in revenge for his support showed that US political capital was very much at stake. Security chiefs from FBI director Robert Mueller down have been emphatic that they consider Snowden to be a dangerous traitor who deserves to be tried in court and that his leaks "caused serious harm" to national security. Much the same language has dominated official responses from the British government about similar Snowden revelations relating to GCHQ. But, in contrast to US politicians and officials, there has been very little official acknowledgement that there is a public interest in holding a debate, and much less any sign that something might need to change as a result. Instead home secretary Theresa May has sought to justify the use of draconian laws to detain David Miranda for assisting Guardian journalists in reporting the story by claiming he was carrying "stolen information that could help terrorists". Former foreign secretary Malcolm Rifkind made similar claims that the Guardian had been "helping terrorists" when defending a decision to force the newspaper to destroy certain computers containing Snowden's leaks. The decision was backed by a former civil libertarian deputy prime minister Nick Clegg. In contrast, US politicians have so far been careful to separate arguments about Snowden's leaks from the right of a free press to report them. White House spokesman Josh Earnest told reporters in Washington on Tuesday that it would "hard to imagine circumstances where it would be appropriate" for the US government to take similar steps to destroy journalistic material. Responding to a recent US outrage at attempts to use criminal powers to pursue separate leaks to the Associated Press and Fox News, attorney general Eric Holder pledged in June that he would never "prosecute journalists for doing their job". A so-called D notice was even issued by authorities in London to deter reporting of the original leaks on Fleet Street — something hard to imagine in a US media and political community that has been consumed by the story for three months. In Germany, there was initially more reporting of Miranda's detention at Heathrow and news of Guardian computers being destroyed than where they happened in London. On Tuesday morning it made the lead story on Spiegel, Zeit, Sueddeutsche, Frankfurter Allgemeine websites before anything had appeared on the Telegraph, Times, Mail or BBC websites. A columnist for Speigel suggested it caused less soul-searching at home than in the US or Germany because "Britons blindly and uncritically trust their secret service". In the UK, the most familiar political line has been the repeated response from foreign secretary William Hague that "the innocent have nothing to fear", but it has not been enough to keep Washington quiescent.