9.02am AEST Let me share some commentary from last night's debate. A lovely outing from my Guardian Australia colleague Gabby Chan, on the nerd versus the boxer. Does this guy ever shut up?" Abbott asked. It was the moment that stopped everyone in their tracks. Audience members laughed nervously and looked around. Some appeared to be thinking: “I’ve wanted to say that to that turkey for years.” Others looked embarrassed, as if they were thinking: “I knew that bloke was a bully.” The nerdy kid looked secretly thrilled. People always resort to that sort of tactic, when they are losing, he said. It certainly looked that way. As a format, the people’s forum won hands down over the first sterile version, sans audience. Abbott asked for it. And the nerdy kid gave it to him. The Conversation's Michelle Grattan. There was some speculation that Abbott’s interjection, “does this guy ever shut up?” was all about reinforcing the perception (and reality) that Rudd blathers. To me, it just sounded ill-disciplined and rude, costing Abbott marks in an assessment of how he went. And Rudd’s riposte – “we’re having a discussion mate” – was effective. Abbott didn’t look too happy when questioned afterwards about his crack. The Australian Financial Review's Laura Tingle. Kevin, of the droning 10 minute monologues on the campaign trail, was replaced by a more succinct, more positive character. He set out the ground he wanted to fight on – jobs, education and health – and his credentials on the latter two, though as Mr Abbott noted at the end of the debate, never really quite said what he was going to do about delivering on all his jobs’ rhetoric. Where Mr Rudd really shone over Mr Abbott, however, was in the effective use of the debating forum to put questions directly to the Opposition Leader, particularly on the question of how he would fund his massive paid parental leave scheme and cuts to health spending. It was one of the few occasions we got close to feeling Mr Abbott was under any pressure to say what spending cuts he had in mind. Updated at 9.03am AEST