Top eight stories on MediaGuardian Guardian told to destroy NSA files for national security, says Nick Clegg Clegg's spokesman confirms that Sir Jeremy Heywood made request on instructions of David Cameron Press freedom watchdog to David Cameron: UK has abused anti-terror laws Committee to Protect Journalists points to 'disturbing record of official harassment of the Guardian' Netflix reaches 1.5m UK subscribers Analysts say hits including House of Cards and Breaking Bad have helped on-demand service gain ground Channel 5 returns to homegrown drama Channel makes first investment in British drama in eight years, with series from executive producer of The Bill Virgin Media signs Christine Ohuruogu to be part of advertising campaign Usain Bolt and Mo Farah joined by World Champion sprinter who has signed a reported six-figure sponsorship deal Sun reporter to face no further action as part of Operation Tuleta Rhodri Phillips held in July last year on suspicion of "handling stolen goods" in relation to an incident involving MP's phone Journalists under threat in Egypt After a spate of attacks and detentions, the Committee to Protect Journalists has highlighted the targeting of media representatives in Egypt News Corp reveals plan to boost advertising following paywall launch Move, to be used by Sun, Times and Wall Street Journal, will cut out use of third-party ad networks selling online ad space Top comment on MediaGuardian Al Jazeera America: the news channel Americans deserve Ana Marie Cox: What Glenn Beck calls 'the voice of the enemy' must be worth a second look. And it is: cable news needs its in-depth journalism Today's headlines The Guardian How Edward Snowden's revelations led to pressure on the Guardian. P6 Barrie Humphries to join Inbetweeners star Joe Thomas in Sky1's Chickens. P13 Sony reveals launch date for PlayStation 4. P13 The Sun's Rhodri Phillips will not face charges under Operation Tuleta. P16 E4 to screen revamp of The Tomorrow People. P16 Netflix boosts UK audience. P26 Journalists could access Bloomberg client data. P28 Lord Falconer: Terrorism Act was misused in David Miranda case. P30 Letters: the Guardian's role in the David Miranda case. P3 Daily Telegraph BBC licence cases make up one in 10 prosecutions. P1 Row as BBC 'censors' Israel claims at Prom. P4 Charges against Jim Davidson dropped. P4 Nick Clegg refuses to endorse the detention of journalist's partner. P10 Gary Lineker say he would earn more outside the BBC. P13 Whistleblower jailed for 35 years. P19 Interview: The Oldie's Richard Ingrams. P30 Facebook founders drive to boost web access. B1 STV to pay first dividend for seven years. B3 Financial Times US military mined Twitter in anti-terrorist project. P4 Robert Shrimsley on LinkedIn opening itself up to students from age 13. P10 Bloomberg acts on data issues. P15 Richard Waters: Tech executives facing up to new realities of the cloud. P19 The Times Nigella Lawson breaks public silence to tweet during The Great British Bake Off. P3 Ofcom fines Al Ehya Digital Television £85,000. P4 Sun journalist told he will face no further action under Operation Tuleta. P4 Police drop action against Jim Davidson over sex claims. P9 TV licence evasion 'clogging up' magistrates' courts. P24 Carold Midgley: Why object to radio sex? T2 P2 Obituary: BBC journalist Douglas Stuart. P53 The Independent Facebook founder's audacious bid to put the entire planet online. P5 Nick Clegg backs PM over Miranda detention. P9 Jim Davidson will not face sex charges due to lack of evidence. P14 Whether or not you support Snowden leaks, what has happened since is disquieting. P16 Internet porn filters 'risk hurting LGBT community'. P26 Top Boy actor Ashley Waters chides black UK stars for 'running away to US". P29 Ukip peer calls for TV-licence reform. P30 Fox News fires public relations manager over 'financial irregularities'. P34 STV resumes dividend payouts. P57 i Nick Clegg confirms PM's right-hand man pressured media. P7 Jim Davidson 'pleased' over sex offence investigation is dropped. P9 Facebook founder plans to get 'the other 5 billion' online. P31 Wall Street Journal Europe NSA reaches deep into U.S to spy on Internet. P10 Opinion: Snowden's Miranda warning. P12 Facebook teams up with six others to promote web access. P18 Google may have found a path to the end zone for Internet TV. P28 Daily Mail Comedian Jim Davidson won't face court over sex assault. P1, P7 Great British Bake Off achieves record audience as five contestants slice their fingers. P9 WikiLeaks whistleblower jailed for 35 years but may be out in 10. P12 Sir Malcolm Rifkind says Guardian leaks could have helped terrorists. P12 3,000 prosecutions every week for not having a TV licence. P19 STV investors set to catch dividend. P79 Daily Express Comedian Jim Davidson cleared of alleged sex offences. P4 WikiLeaks whistleblower Bradley Manning jailed for 35 years. P19 Leo McKinstry - What about some respect for UK's national security. P14 New love tangles lie ahead for Downton Abbey's Lady Mary. P21 Production deals and advertising help STV boost first-half profits. P57 The Sun Michelle Collins confirms she will quit Coronation Street in April. P3 Carol Vorderman appears flying solo for the first time on This Morning. P3 Jim Davidson told he will not face 'no further action' over sex abuse allegations. P7 The Sun's Rhodri Phillips will not face charges under Operation Tuleta. P16 Coronation Street star Chris Fountain deletes Twitter account. TV Biz P1 Mel B to be judge on ITV dance show Stepping Out. TV Biz P1 Interview with Denise Black on her move from Coronation Street to Emmerdale. TV Biz P2-3 Jack Whitehall and his dad to host BBC3 chatshow. TV Biz P4 Daily Mirror Dermot O'Leary confirms Gary Barlow is to leave The X Factor – and hints he would love to be on the panel. P7 Jim Davidson told he will not face 'no further action' over sex abuse allegations. P9 ASA decides not to investigate Marmite ad despite 504 complaints. P14 Lady Gaga calls on social networks to crack down on bullies and trolls. P17 Daily Star Gary Lineker says he's now a big softy. P3 Sacked Coronation Street actor closes Twitter account and flees Britain. P7 Ratings for The Great British Bake Off rocket. P15 Comic Jim Davidson to face no further action over sex offence allegations. P21 BBC facing 140 bullying claims by staff. P26 Channel 5 to make its first crime drama. P37 Go to MediaGuardian