Top eight stories on MediaGuardian Kevin Spacey: TV is entering new golden age Actor cites Game of Thrones and Breaking Bad as examples of modern triumphs, but rails against shift towards conservatism Dustin Hoffman and Judi Dench to star in Roald Dahl adaptation for BBC Feature film based on classic children's book Esio Trot will be adapted by director Richard Curtis Danny Boyle returns to TV with with Channel 4 pilot Oscar-winning British director to work on new police series Babylon as part of broadcaster's new programming schedule Jay Hunt dismisses Channel 5's audience claims Chief creative officer says rival's claims it has recently beaten Channel 4 audiences is ruse requiring 'squinting' to make true. Tony Hall pledges to heal BBC divide over payoffs Broadcaster's director general says he understands anger at severance payments but defends high salaries for 'right people' David Miranda wins partial court victory Court restricts authorities 'inspecting, copying or sharing' data, as Met launches criminal inquiry after analysing information Mobile devices lag behind TVs for viewing Typical UK viewer watches 90 minutes a month on devices other than TV set, but figure still dwarfed by the near four hours of programming watched each day by average Briton on traditional set Rebekah Brooks trial on phone-hacking charges delayed Former News International chief executive, Andy Coulson and six others will appear in court at end of October Top comment on MediaGuardian Why Local World is a beacon of hope for regional newspapers Roy Greenslade presents another extract from the updated second edition of the book about local journalism, What do we mean by local? Today's headlines The Guardian Tony Hall pledges to heal BBC divide over payoffs. P1, 3 David Miranda wins partial court victory over seized data. P2 Forget the 50s and the 80s: this is TV's new golden age, says Kevin Spacey. P3 Prison Break actor comes out as he snubs Russian film festival. P7 Phone-hacking trial delayed for seven weeks. P20 Assange's WikiLeaks party disintegrates. P27 Apple: Speculation over TV is rife, but wearable device is more likely. P31 Yahoo pushes Google off top spot in US. P32 Comment: Kevin Spacey: Why I welcome the end of the watercooler moment. P37 Daily Telegraph Dame Judi Dench and Dustin Hoffman to star in TV adaptation of Roald Dahl story. P4 Criminal investigation into files seized during Heathrow detention. P7 BBC officer class enrages people, chief admits. P15 Actor Wentworth Miller comes out to condemn Russia. P23 Watch out, the BBC is coming after you if you don't have a TV licence. P25 Kevin Spacey urges TV: love the net, or be left behind. B1 Yahoo overtakes Google in US web traffic. B3 BBC boss joins Sky rival in the digital gold rush. B5 How to harness the power of social media. B6 Financial Times Police launch David Miranda inquiry. P2 Nokia: A bet with a safety net. P7 Nokia rivals already looking past the smartphone. P7 Comment: Al-Jazeera News: a good kind of un-American. P8 Personal technology: The bearable lightness of being a laptop. P10 Sina launches chat offensive. P13 Former Windows chief returns to Silicon Valley. P14 The Times Kevin Spacey says: let's kill off the TV cliffhanger. P3 Lord Tony Hall admits officer class existed at the BBC. P3 The trial of Rebekah Brooks is delayed. P4 Judges let police see seized files 'that put lives at risk'. P11 Dame Judi Dench and Dustin Hoffman to star in Roald Dahl BBC adaptation. P26 Journalist found dead in Karachi. P43 The Independent Edward Snowden leaks reveal UK's secret Middle East web surveillance base. P1, 4 David Brent to follow Alan Partridge onto the big screen. P6 Kevin Spacey says complacent TV industry will lose out to the internet. P11 New London Live channel will showcase emerging talent. P11 Actor Wentworth Miller has come out as gay in a letter declining invite to Russian film festival. P16 The trial of Rebekah Brooks and seven other defendants put back by two months. P31 Online abusers of footballers to face prosecution. P31 i Secret UK monitoring station revealed. P7 Data seized from David Miranda sparks terror investigation. P7 Prison Break actor outs himself by declining invite to Russian film festival. P15 Gabby Logan speaks of her anger at anti-gay Russia. P21 Kevin Spacey says British TV lacks ambition. P25 Microsoft bribery probe extended. P49 SuperCasino.com to sponsor Celebrity Big Brother. P50 Wall Street Journal Europe UK police search materials seized from David Miranda. P5 China Mobile preparing to source from Europe. P16 Microsoft bribe probe reaches Russia. P17 Daily Mail Quit while you're ahead, Downton Abbey's star actor tells its creator. P5 Terror police launch probe into Guardian's secret files. P6 Are envious BBC1 bosses poised to poach The Great British Bake Off? P7 BBC boss says staff divide meant no one halted the £100m IT fiasco. P12 Gary Lineker says he's paid too much. P12 Richard Littlejohn: Jim Davidson and a deranged witch-hunt. P14 Rival villages both claim to be the inspiration for The Archers. P24 Threat to the TV licence as more watch on the web. P26 Daily Express Big Brother coverage P1, 2, 3 Racy lady who'll spice up things on Strictly Come Dancing. P19 Simon Cowell wants to become a Hollywood big shot and produce a blockbuster. P20 The Sun David Miranda: Met terror quiz after snooping leaks raid. P13 Beeb fat cats vow. P14 Loose Women stars in three-month fight to save their TV jobs. P27 Daily Mirror Rising Bake Off's set for primetime. P3 Probe over David Miranda anti-terror 'spy' swoop. P11 Match of the Day boots out old boys club. P19 Daily Star Celebrity Big Brother coverage. P1, 4, 5, 6, 7 Simon Cowell looks like waxwork in posters for new series of US X Factor. P3 Loose Women star Denise Welch defends sacked Coronation Street actor. P9 Nigella Lawson breaks silence to post Twiitter picture during Great British Bake Off. P23 Go to MediaGuardian