Top eight stories on MediaGuardian Spacey lecture prompts defence of traditional TV Hollywood star's view that TV executives must embrace online met with call for hybrid viewing model David Blunkett accuses broadcasters of failing deaf and blind people Labour MP criticises garbled subtitles, lack of dubbing and a 'worship of youth' at the expense of UK's ageing population David Cameron's response to NSA leaks is intimidation, says world press body World Association of Newspapers and News Publishers tells the UK government its actions could threaten press freedom Lance Armstrong settles with Sunday Times Disgraced cyclist reaches 'mutually acceptable' settlement with newspaper he sued for libel before doping confession No 10 attacks editors over paparazzi beach shots of David Cameron Photographs showed sunburnt, bare-chested PM struggling to put on his bathing trunks Alan Yentob: BBC must tackle 'toxic' issue of pay Creative director says he understands anger over payoffs, but insists it will not happen any more and it is time to move on Channel 5 boss Ben Frow hits back in Channel 4 ratings row Controller says he will not dwell on one-week victory over rival, adding there is an unfair perception his channel is an 'also-ran' ITV wins channel of the year at Edinburgh TV festival Broadcaster recognised for Jimmy Savile documentary and drama Broadchurch, which also lands new programme award Top comment on MediaGuardian Tony Hall should look back 40 years if he wants to restore the BBC's ethos Kath Worrall: The Corporation was far from perfect, but public service, not executive pay and perks, mattered more to staff Today's headlines The Guardian Chips, cheese and giant TVs: Jamie Oliver bemoans poor food choices. P3 Daily Telegraph Sort out your subtitles David Blunkett tells TV chiefs. P1 Cameron set to promote ex-GMTV presenter Esther McVey. P6 Poor buy big TVs and eat junk, says Jamie Oliver. P9 QVC shopping channel has come a long way. B3 Financial Times Microsoft's new chief executive should stop chasing consumers. P9 Skyscanner doubles workforce. P14 Cheaper iPhone seeks to retain core values. P15 The Times Memo to Microsoft new chief executive – we want good products not priests. P25 The Kremlin helped Snowden from the start. P33 The Independent David Blunkett wants broadcasters to dub more foreign TV. P21 Will the merger of Omnicom and Publicis mean clients jump ship to WPP? P50 Wall Street Journal Europe New Microsoft chief executive has to fix firm's culture. P18 Daily Mail Bake Off presenter Mel: I put on 11 pounds during filming. P9 David Blunkett accuses broadcasters of giving poor service to people with sight and hearing problems. P21 Boozy soaps blamed for encouraging people to drink. P27 Jamie Oliver: Poor wasting money on TV meals. P27 Daily Express Jamie Oliver slates families who buy worst food and best TVs. P13 David Blunkett calls for more dubbing on foreign films. P13 The Sun BBC blunders showing helicopter promo before crash. P16 Daily Mirror TV's Monty Don reveals his gardening secrets. P9 Edward Snowden stayed in Russian embassy in Hong Kong. P11 Jamie Oliver: Poor prefer a big TV to good food. P19 Daily Star Celebrity Big Brother backs Coronation Street's Kevin. P6, 7 Go to MediaGuardian