Martyrs for our rights Barack Obama is disingenuous to say he would have reviewed the practices of telephony surveillance had Edward Snowden not blown the whistle (NSA review promised, 16 August). Our protectors have demonstrated time and time again that they will cynically exploit legal loopholes to achieve extreme goals not originally envisaged by lawmakers. This has been the case in the questionable legality of the Prism programme and it is entirely appropriate for it to be scrutinised as carefully as it is now. While many people might not be concerned, the telephony metadata are themselves so private that it should be a citizen's right to know by which authority they have been collected. In the case of America's Guantánamo tortured detainees or Australia's spurned asylum seekers, both governments have cynically tried to convince us that the victims cannot appeal to basic legal rights because they are marooned on excised territories. Doublethink aside, we are told to accept that the ends justify the means. But we must be allowed to know what those means are before casting judgment. The government should not be an authority we tolerate or quietly evade, but something that represents our values, and can be relied upon to treat us by agreed-upon rules. Snowden and Bradley Manning both knowingly broke their country's laws and will suffer predictable consequences. They might not be patriots in Obama's dictionary, but they truly have martyred themselves for the rights of citizens to keep their state accountable. Mic Cavazzini Sydney, Australia The teaching of history Colm Tóibín writes a spirited defence of the necessity of teaching history, and in particular the competing-narrative view of history, in schools (No more grand historical narratives, 16 August). I was interested and impressed, but he suddenly lost all my sympathy when he declared that such study was more important to students "than algebra, say, or adding two and two''. As a scientist and a published historian, I feel entitled to object. Even in a place where history is present as much as Ireland, making sound economic transactions requires more than adding one and one. When the consumer is faced with figures about the efficacies of medical treatments, the ability to do basic algebra and to understand statistics enables far better decisions to be made. Likewise for voters to assess claims about immigration or foreign aid. These elementary mathematical skills should not to be compared with the ability to "think sceptically and creatively about the past'' in the context of the Easter rebellion. Rather, they should be compared with having the basic historical knowledge without which students would not know that the 1916 rebellion took place in the middle of the first world war. That is, assuming that they can add two and two. Howard Wiseman Brisbane, Australia • In discussing "history", Colm Tóibín questions recent topics in education. My "history" courses from 1940 to 1947 progressively taught from prehistoric times through European conquests to 18th-century European quarrels. Of diminishing interest, this subject ceased, thankfully, to be a requirement for matriculation. In school, "history" was (still is?) subject to the machinations of politicians. Thanks to good libraries, I discovered the achievements of Watt, Brunel and other giants who determined our civilisation. Why were these not taught as "history"? It is not just that Henry Ford declaimed "History is bunk", but rather that its teachers were technologically ignorant. Get real, you teachers: teach how Shockley, Bardeen and Brattain made the world in which we live. Jack Palmer Watson, ACT, Australia The fight for gay rights Stand your ground, young Russians (Gay Russian teens live in fear, 16 August). In 1988 Hobart city council (HCC) banned a market stall set up by the Tasmanian Gay Law Reform Group to gather signatures petitioning for the decriminalisation of homosexuality. Over the next seven weeks, 130 people were arrested and charged with trespass for crossing the infamous "yellow line" around the stall. HCC then ordered the arrest of anyone found in the Salamanca Market precinct who was a known homosexual, or who was in possession of a copy of the petition. Protests and arrests proliferated. The ban was reversed later that year. Homosexuality was finally decriminalised in Tasmania in 1997. In 2008 HCC made a public apology and commissioned Justy Phillips to create a commemorative artwork near the site of the original stall. It simply reads: "Forgive me for not holding you in my arms." Annie March West Hobart, Tasmania, Australia Island is much too crowded After decades of agreeing with almost every word that Polly Toynbee has written, I find myself in utter disagreement (Britain's booming birthrate, 16 August). Just how many is too many on such a tiny island? This argument about the need for young workers to support the increasing numbers of the old must come from people who have not set foot in a manufacturing plant, refinery etc for decades. It takes a fraction of the number of employees necessary even 25 years ago. Has Toynbee not seen the unemployment figures for youth across Europe? The jobs are not there and they are not coming back – are they all going to work in retail or healthcare? Certainly you could fit a few million more in the UK as long as you remove the few remaining trees, build on the last of the open spaces, kill off the last of the wild animals and push up the greenhouse gases a bit more. But is that a life or the life of a battery hen? Tony Taylor Victoria, British Columbia, Canada • In Britain's booming birthrate, Polly Toynbee wrote "All this looks almost unequivocally good news for the future … if the country makes the right choices" and "if we seize the opportunity to plan well". So Dr Pangloss has joined the camp of the progressive-minded? Is she aware of the inconvenient truth that the UK's 2012 balance of payments deficit was a mere $92bn? Is she aware that of this the deficit on the import and export of goods alone was $168bn? The only thing we appear to be self-sufficient in, in Britain, is taking in each other's washing. Every new mouth in Britain requires imports, regardless of whether the mouth belongs to someone making something for export or working in ever-improving social services. Most adult new mouths will want a car, housing, water, electricity, food. Where will we put the cars and the new houses? Where will the water come from, the fuel to generate the electricity? Where will the money for food imports come from? How many of the adult new mouths will want to send their wages back to the countries they come from? How many people emigrating to avoid greater and greater overcrowding in Britain will choose to remove their capital from the UK, and draw their UK pensions overseas? Choices, choices, choices. But of course, if you're progressive-minded it's easy to make the right choices, to plan your way out of any minor difficulties like this. Don Montague Sainte-Innocence, France We need more Marxism John Simpson, in New leader Xi Jinping opens door to reform in China, 16 August, writes of Marxism-Leninism in a disparaging way that I find unacceptable. Marx and Lenin cared about the poor, they cared about injustice and they would care about the way that capitalism is destroying the world: they do not deserve such perfidious treatment. It is true that the tone in which he writes is very much in tune with what is to be found in the media, but let us remind ourselves that the media are owned by the very class that Marx and Lenin would have liked to remove from power. We need more, not less, Marxism-Leninism. Climate change provides evidence that we need it yesterday. Ken Ranney Peterborough, Ontario, Canada Prince is not just any baby As a big fan of Steve Bell's work, I feel David Stieber (Reply, 16 August) has misunderstood the intent of the Prince George cartoon. It's not about this individual baby, or whether he will be a nice or nasty person when he grows up; it's about the institution he is born to represent. The same issue includes a report on his grandfather's probable lobbying of government (Prince's veto on laws to be examined by parliament): a man whose estate is not subject to inheritance tax. His great-grandmother's estates have greatly increased in value in the past financial year, while his parents' palace home has nevertheless been recently refurbished at taxpayers' expense. All these privileged circumstances are more than sufficient justification for Bell's cartoons. Thank goodness for at least a drop of critical intent! Orlaith Kelly Cordoba, Spain What it's like to die Professor Anil Seth wonders what it is like to die (23 August). While there have been numerous reports of what people claim to have experienced, my preference is for Paul Simon's version, as expressed in American Tune: And I dreamed I was dying / I dreamed that my soul rose unexpectedly /And looking back down at me / Smiling reassuringly / I dreamed I was flying. Can there be a more blissful way to leave this world? Shmaiel Nona Burradoo, NSW, Australia Briefly • I never knew. When a campsite is shut because of the plague, it is "shuttered" (9 August). Simon Rice Randwick, NSW, Australia • If the CIA is itching for another pretext for warring (16 August) to play "the mighty Wurlitzer" and test out their muscles and gizmos, may I suggest invading the Duchy of Grand Fenwick or Freedonia (Duck Soup) to punish them for their impudence and mirth. Or maybe the Lilliputians are getting uppity again. R M Fransson Denver, Colorado, US Please send letters to weekly.letters@guardian.com