'There will be no survivors' ... director Uwe Boll appealing for funds on Kickstarter. Photograph: Kickstarter He has been called the world's worst director, a veritable Ed Wood for the 21st century. Now Germany's Uwe Boll is hoping to pick up the mantle "king of Kickstarter" after taking to the popular crowdfunding site in the hope of raising $500,000 for his new movie - a political comedy inspired in part by NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden. Boll, who received a lifetime Razzie award in 2009 for his services to terrible film-making, is hoping fans will stump up the cash for a sequel to Postal, a video game movie adaptation which was released in 2007 to universal derision. On his Kickstarter page he writes: "Postal 2 will be a controversial comedy in which we take up current political issues. We take the biggest scandals of our democracy, like the happenings about Julien Assange and Edward Snowdon (sic) and show that there is no difference between our democracy and the prison camps in Russia or China. We show that through this massive monitoring our communication data is not safe anymore! We want to make a movie which is totally uncensored, pointed against everything and everybody, against every political party and every religion. There will be no survivors." Boll's campaign for a "controversial comedy about current political issues" is refreshingly bereft of the usual earnest Kickstarter tales of failed financing and determination to deliver a movie without studio interference. Under the subtitle "Where the money goes" The German film-maker writes: "The money goes all for cocaine for the stars down the nose". "This movie is important and nobody besides Uwe Boll got the balls to make it," he adds. The film-maker behind such execrable titles as Blood Rayne, Far Cry, House of the Dead, Alone in the Dark and Dungeon Siege has given himself two months to reach the total and has so far raised £7,887 from 178 backers. Rewards range from an "exclusive" newsletter for those willing to stump up $5 to an executive producer's credit and full access to the film shoot in Vancouver for $10,000. All being well, Boll hopes to film in spring 2014 for a release the following August. The director is following in the footsteps of Spike Lee, Scrubs star Zach Braff and the makers of the cancelled US TV show Veronica Mars, all of whom have launched successful Kickstarter campaigns for crowd-funded movies. More on Uwe Boll and Kickstarter • Uwe Boll goes arthouse • German director's Holocaust film causes outrage • Spike Lee reaches Kickstarter target