In the picture … smartphones can empower the individual, sending images round the world in the media. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images New entry A break from tradition in the MediaGuardian 100. For the first time this year our panel wanted to use the No 1 spot to reflect the extent to which the individual had become empowered in the online age. Everyone can be a broadcaster-publisher in the digital era, as the unfurling of the horrific events in Woolwich, east London – and Boston marathon bombings – demonstrated. Once an eyewitness account was confined to the evening news bulletin or the next day's paper. Now, with smartphones and social media, it comes with pictures and video, updated in real time and retweeted around the world. It is a phenomenon that goes beyond breaking news in an online age where everyone can be a critic, a trend setter and – a less welcome consequence of social media – a troll. The judges' preference for "you" at the summit of this year's list was also a reflection of the burgeoning digital economy in the UK, increasingly driven by our ability to interact, consume and share content and shop via mobile devices. Growing at more than 10% a year and estimated to be worth £225bn by 2016, it has been fuelled by the spread of smartphones and iPads, the popularity of Facebook and Twitter and the boom in online commerce. Broadcasters, publishers and advertising agencies are scrambling to adapt to the mobile and social media digital age and the huge volume of personal data it generates – for which the likes of Google, Apple and Facebook are increasingly the gatekeepers. From Channel 4's 4oD registration initiative to newspapers' bundled print, web and mobile subscription offerings and WPP's partnership with Twitter, the media and advertising industries are getting to grips with user data to enable deeper engagement with consumers. "The internet economy is bigger than education, healthcare or construction, growing faster than in any other country in the G20, and what drives that is consumers," said our panel. "Both as the audience and creators of content, it's all about people power." However, no such declaration about the empowerment of the individual in the digital era could be made without reference to NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden and the resulting revelations about how much of the world's communications were being monitored by US and UK security agencies. "The power of them, versus the power of all of us, will be the narrative," said one panellist. "Them" could be a government, it could be big business; we can't really be sure any more. A consequence of the discomforting dual sense of empowerment – and exposure – that the digital age has wrought. Rarely has the question posed by the Big Data era – the balance to be struck between the right to gather and exploit personal information within the law and the rights of the individual – been put into such stark relief (and been argued so fiercely). If the creeping data grab is nothing new in an era of storecards, smartphones and Facebook pages on which we willingly give up our most intimate details, then the idea of total surveillance set in train a debate about national security, civil liberties, freedom of speech and privacy that is likely to dominate the coming year.