It was a year of extraordinary upheaval in the media, from the Jimmy Savile scandal to the Leveson report to revelations about the scope of state surveillance of the internet. If the fallout will be felt for some time to come, then the impact on the MediaGuardian 100, our annual survey of the industry's most powerful people, was more immediate. When this list was last published 12 months ago, George Entwistle was about to start his first day as director general of the BBC. "An unknown quantity as a leader, spokesman or negotiator," we said back then. Now we know, the nascent DG was found wanting at the height of the Savile scandal and quit after just 54 days in the job. But as the subsequent Pollard report concluded, he wasn't alone. Nor was he the only BBC executive to receive a big money payoff – £60m in all, over an eight year period – one of a string of emerging scandals to dog Entwistle's successor, Tony Hall, in his first five months in office. The circumstances of his appointment, and the criticism heaped on BBC Trust chairman Lord Patten, make Hall one of the most powerful DGs of all time, said our judges. His anointed senior team, including James Purnell, James Harding, Danny Cohen and the new controller of BBC1, Charlotte Moore, pepper the upper reaches of this list. There was no shortage of debate about who, or what, should fill this year's top spot (and it's not Hall). Last year occupied by Larry Page, it took more than one person to topple the Google chief executive; indeed, the judges decided, in a first for this list, to recognise the way the digital age has empowered the individual and strengthened the UK economy. This creates an unusual (new) entry at the top of this year's MediaGuardian 100, "you". But no judgment could be made without reference to subsequent revelations by the Guardian and other publications based on information provided by Edward Snowden, the former National Security Agency contractor, about the extent of online surveillance on both sides of the Atlantic. That we left a digital fingerprint was nothing new; the scale on which the state was dusting for these prints in secret was a revelation. As a result, the digital age brings a discomforting dual sense of empowerment and exposure. There is a tricky balancing act to be struck between the rights of the individual and the rights of the state and big business – including media and technology companies – to gather and exploit personal information within the law, a debate that will be played out for years to come. Ten months after the publication of Lord Justice Leveson's 2,000 page report into the culture, practices and ethics of the press, the future of press regulation in the UK remains unclear, the issue clouded by competing royal charters and division, both within the press and beyond, about what form it should take. Leveson said he was "determined not to do is produce a document that simply sits on the second shelf of a professor of journalism's study to discuss with his students as yet another attempt that went nowhere". On that the jury must remain out, hence the lord justice of appeal's appearance in this year's list at No 100, the spot previously occupied by James Murdoch. There is also a space in this year's list for one of the key figures involved in trying to put together a post-Leveson press regulator, Lord Black. New entries in this year's top 10 include Sheryl Sandberg, the chief operating officer of Facebook, and Apple chief executive Tim Cook, while Mail Online editor Martin Clarke breaks into the top 20 for the first time. Mike Darcey, chief executive of Rupert Murdoch's newly-restyled News UK (previously News International) also makes his debut. It is a reflection of the changing face of Murdoch's UK newspaper empire – with the fallout from the phone-hacking scandal still to be played out in the courts – that all three of his titles have new editors since last year: the Sun's David Dinsmore, John Witherow at the Times and Martin Ivens at the Sunday Times. Other debutants include Gavin Patterson, the BT chief executive challenging Sky with live Premier League football, Matt Brittin, Google's representative, if not on earth, then in the UK (and beyond), and the new(ish) Pearson chief executive, John Fallon. On-air talent to feature for the first time includes the year's brightest acting star, Olivia Colman, and the man who wrote the hit ITV drama, Broadchurch, in which she appeared opposite David Tennant, Chris Chibnall. There is also a place for the new voice – and second female presenter – on Radio 4's Today, Mishal Husain, along with the face of BBC entertainment, Graham Norton, and Clare Balding, still riding high from last year's Olympics (and Bafta-winning Paralympics). On the rise are Reed Hastings, chief executive of online TV service Netflix, and Samsung's co-chief executive Kwon Oh-hyun, taking the smartphone fight to Apple. Moving in the opposite direction is culture secretary, Maria Miller, after what our panel deemed a lacklustre 12 months, and Helen Boaden, who survived the Savile debacle but moved from her role as director of BBC News to head up the BBC's radio division. This year's youngest entry is David Karp, the founder and chief executive of Tumblr, bought by Yahoo for $1.1bn. But it is farewell to Dame Marjorie Scardino, the former Pearson boss and an ever-present on this list since 2001, ex-Sun editor Dominic Mohan and Lord Sugar, who went out with a bang at fledgling internet TV offering YouView in a bust up with Richard Desmond. Now in its 13th year, the MediaGuardian 100 is a snapshot of media power today. Candidates are judged on three criteria – cultural, economic and political influence in the UK (although they do not have to be based in the UK to qualify). It comes with the now traditional disclaimer that no list is ever definitive, nor can it hope to be. It is intended to be a starting point for discussion, rather than the end of it. The debate begins now.