Germans watch the sole TV election debate between German Chancellor Angela Merkel and Social Democratic party challenger Peer Steinbrück. Photograph: Peter Steffen/ Peter Steffen/dpa/Corbis Sunday night's television debate between Angela Merkel and Peer Steinbrück has finally given a dose of much-needed spice to the hitherto rather downbeat German election campaign, as well as helping to focus voters' minds. But with the newspapers unconvinced that either candidate had landed a knockout punch, and most of the exchanges civil and unspectacular, it was a small item of jewellery that stole the show. Beyond the nitty-gritty of low-paid work and pension reform, it was the German chancellor's coloured stone and polished metal necklace in the national colours of red, gold and black that prompted the liveliest reaction. As vexillologists were quick to point out, the colours were in the wrong order to mirror the German flag. But within half an hour, the schlandkette had its own twitter account, and now more than 6,500 followers. German Chancellor Angela Merkel's necklace. Photograph: Fabrizio Bensch/Reuters It was a sign, some commentators said, of just how "content-free" the election campaign has been thus far. Merkel stood out in the 90-minute primetime tussle for her sobriety, while Steinbrück drew plaudits for his hawkishness. The Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (FAZ) said Merkel had wasted her energies having been prepared to take the wind out of Steinbrück's sails, because, the paper reckoned, he had come "without any wind". Every time Steinbrück sought to confront Merkel, FAZ wrote, "she just laughed his arguments off". The liberal Süddeutsche Zeitung described the encounter as balanced, with "neither candidate able to deliver a unforgettable blow to the other", with both "showing they could be entrusted to govern the country". The tabloid Bild offered a more upbeat appraisal, with commentator and former government spokesman Bela Anda calling it "a TV duel of surprises", with Steinbrück "proving surprisingly aggressive … gaining in … drive and stature over the 90 minutes". While Merkel came a little unstuck on at least two issues (NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden and car tolls), "her advantage was that her core message: 'we're doing better than we were four years ago' is supported by economic data", he said. The Stuttgarter Nachrichten (praised Steinbrück's "dashes of humour" and Merkel's ability to "stay true to herself", and to remain "above party political minutiae, with an iron twinkle in her eye". As widely predicted in advance, the paper concluded, the debate delivered "no surprises or personal insights". However, most praise was heaped on the popular entertainer and erstwhile "bad boy" of German TV, Stefan Raab, one of the four moderators, whose confrontational approach towards the seasoned politicians was widely seen as one of the most refreshing aspects of a debate that might otherwise have appeared too rehearsed and wooden.