A Russian officer puts his cap on shadow immigration minister Chris Bryant during the Love Russia, Hate Homophobia protest. Photograph: Paul Davey/Demotix/Corbis Barack Obama and David Cameron have made clear they will take Vladimir Putin to task for Russia's discriminatory treatment of gay people during the G20 summit in Russia this week. In bilateral talks, the prime minister will challenge the Russian president over a recent law banning ''propaganda'' for non-traditional sexual relationships among minors, Downing Street said. Cameron's plans were confirmed just before an estimated 1,000 people gathered for a Love Russia, Hate Homophobia rally outside Downing Street on Tuesday. Obama has invited Russian human rights campaigners, including lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) activists, to meet him during the summit. The invitation comes after Obama cancelled a Moscow summit with Putin over the temporary asylum Russia granted to the fugitive NSA whistleblower, Edward Snowden, last month. The two leaders are not scheduled to meet one-on-one during the G20 summit in Saint Petersburg. Putin has attempted to allay fears that athletes or spectators will fall foul of the gay propaganda law if they express support for LGBT people at next year's Winter Olympics in Sochi. In an interview with the Associated Press and Russia's main state-controlled television channel, broadcast on Wednesday, the president promised that they would not be punished and claimed gay people were not discriminated against in Russia. "I assure you that I work with these people, I sometimes award them with state prizes or decorations for their achievements in various fields," Putin said. "We have absolutely normal relations and I don't see anything out of the ordinary here." He added that Russians loved Tchaikovsky even though the composer was said to have been homosexual. "Truth be told, we don't love him because of that, but he was a great musician and we all love his music," Putin said. Russia's president offered to meet members of the gay and lesbian community if they asked to see him – an offer Igor Kochetkov of the Russian LGBT Network says does not excuse his failure to protect the rights of citizens. Kochetkov and other activists will meet Obama on Friday at a hotel near Saint Petersburg's Pulkovo airport. Kochetkov said he intended call for direct dialogue between the US president and Putin over LGBT rights in Russia. "Putin says there is no problem with discrimination against gay people. Someone needs to convince him the opposite is true," he said. Following the interview, the gay activist Nikolai Alekseev tweeted a request to meet Putin and said he would file an official request on Wednesday, the state news agency Interfax reported.