The Russian president Vladimir Putin welcomes US president Barack Obama at the start of the G20 summit in St Petersburg. Photograph: Eric Feferberg/AFP Sir John Major once memorably described EU negotiations as 12-dimensional chess, a phrase that has recently been ascribed in America to Barack Obama's fraught efforts to assemble a diplomatic and political coalition to support a US attack on Syria. But trying to get a handle on what is happening at a G20 summit in St Petersburg requires more than 12 dimensions. The permutations of discussions are myriad; the Russian city has become a maze of bilaterals, , plenaries, brush-bys, informals, dinners, light and dance shows and quick chats between 20 world leaders attending. There are also their finance ministers, plus the various hangers-on from bodies such as the EU, the Financial Stability Board, the United Nations, the World Trade Organisation – all enough to leave any mortal gasping for breath. St Petersburg airport looks like the presidential aeroplane lot, in which David Cameron's modest British Airways jet fails to stand out. Even the Pope has got in on the act, urging in a letter to the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, to stage a day of fasting for Syria. The only world figure missing seemed to be the Dalai Lama, or possibly Gareth Bale, and no world problem from the Rock of Gibraltar to the mountains of Tibet is immune from discussion in this political bazaar. In theory, this vast array of political and economic talent has assembled in the gilded, chandeliered magnificence of St Petersburg's Constantine Palace to discuss the global economy. For Putin, it was to be a chance to shine on the world stage, to show off the splendour of his home town and to be respected. Fortunately, for the sherpas, the hapless people that hide in darkened rooms for weeks on end preparing turgid communiques that no one reads, it looked as if the economy would be relatively benign. Almost for the first the time since the behemoth of the G20 was invented, there was not a crisis to solve, either on the world stage or in Europe. At worst, there was the risk of an economic downturn in emerging countries such as India that feared losing hot money due to the end of the monetary stimulus in the US. Putin felt secure in preparing a bland set of proposals on growth, apprentices and jobs. But then, in the early hours of 21 August, astonishing footage started to flood social media sites showing victims of an alleged chemical weapons attack on civilians in and around the agricultural belt of Ghouta, around the Syrian capital of Damascus. Syrian opposition activists had earlier reported heavy fighting in eastern Damascus in districts that were primarily rebel strongholds. The likelihood was that Putin's client, President Bashar al-Assad, was responsible. Within hours, Putin must have probably realised the sight of gassed children on TV screens meant his carefully constructed G20 agenda would have to be torn up. Putin overnight found himself turned from the ringmaster of an economic revival to the protector of an international pariah. It was not as if relations between Obama and Putin had been on a high. Obama had cancelled a bilateral with Putin in protest at his provision of a visa to Edward Snowden, the National Security Agency whistleblower, and instead found time to meet a delegation of gay activists and transsexuals. Putin, 10 years Obama's senior, warned the US president not to break international law by attacking Syria without a UN mandate. On the day before Obama arrived, Putin described the US secretary of state, John Kerry, as a liar – "Well, he [Kerry] lies. And he knows that he lies. This is sad" – not necessarily the most diplomatic language for a host to deploy hours before his guests arrive in the midst of an acute international crisis. By the time Putin stepped forward outside the Constantine Palace in glorious sunlight to greet Obama, the US president was ready to deliver the death stare. They managed 15 seconds of pleasantries, touching on the late summer weather. Elsewhere, Obama was greeted by a chorus of dissent from other world leaders urging him to show restraint. And what of Cameron? It was in St Petersburg, at an earlier G8 summit, that President George Bush famously greeted Tony Blair "Yo, Blair". After his ignominious and mishandled defeat in the Commons last week, relations between the current UK prime minister and US president are more strained. Cameron has been stripped of a central role at this summit, and heavily blames the politicking of Labour leader Ed Miliband. But Cameron has worked as hard as possible within the confines of the Commons vote to show his determination to shake the world out of its lethargy at what he regards as the biggest humanitarian crisis of this century. At a session on Thursday night, including a discussion with Putin, Cameron pressed the case for more funding to help refugees, the need to create humanitarian routes so aid convoys can drive into Syria safely and the need for better chemical weapons protection for Syrians under attack from Assad. It is a noble cause to fight, even if it is not the central role he planned, standing shoulder to shoulder with Obama as he made the case for military action. • This article was amended on 6 September 2013. An earlier version misspelled the Dalai Lama's name as the Dali Lama.