Today, beginning at 3pm ET | 8pm BST, the Guardian's James Ball, who reported on the latest NSA and GCHQ revelations, and cryptology expert Bruce Schneier, who wrote about the implications, will take your questions on the new revelation that the US and UK governments can crack much of the encryption protecting personal data, online transactions and emails – as well as the ongoing debate over surveillance. Toss your questions below and as you wait for a response, re-visit yesterday's stories: • How US and UK spy agencies defeat internet privacy and security • How internet encryption works  • The US government has betrayed the internet. We need to take it back The Q&A is now over.  First Question:  Answer:  James Ball: Because the NSA and GCHQ have been influencing standards, and working to covertly modify code, almost anything could potentially have been compromised. Something as simple as – hypothetically – modifying a basic random-number-generator could weaken numerous implementations of open-source code. That said, anything done to open source projects, particularly popular ones, will have to be subtle, as anyone can audit the code. So I do believe they’re more trustworthy/dependable than other things. But almost nothing is certain, and we see quite regularly bugs/vulnerabilities discovered in major open source projects that have lain undiscovered for months. Question: Answer:  Ball: There’s every reason to think this. The Washington Post mentioned in passing last week the use of ‘implants’, and the New York Times’ take on this story made reference to efforts against “encryption chips”. Question: Answer: Ball: I think we need more awareness of privacy and security generally, and I think as generations grow up net-native (as today’s teens are), that’s taking care of itself. I don’t think people who volunteer information to a strictly-controlled network on Facebook (or webmail, etc) are automatically willing to share that same information with their governments. That’s a large part of what the whole privacy and security debate the NSA files are fueling is about, I think. Question: Answer:  Ball: As you say, I think this is quite difficult, but one thing that is worth flagging is we have a sense of what the US and the other “Five Eyes” nations (the UK, Canada, Australia and New Zealand) are doing, because we have a whistleblower from those agencies. It’s not inconceivable that intelligence agencies in other countries are doing a lot of the same things (it would be surprising if they weren’t doing some of it) – but we won’t hear about them unless a Chinese, Russian, German, Indian, etc, Edward Snowden comes along. I hope they do. Question: Answer:  Ball: Bruce had a great article yesterday (http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/05/nsa-how-to-remain-secure-surveillance) on what to do to try to secure your own communications. I think it’s a brilliant starting place, especially for journalists and activists. Even though he’s described it well, of course, I think it’s beyond the expertise levels of 95%+ of internet users. This stuff is seriously hard, and I hope the crypto community carries on trying to make it easier. As to the second question, the solution is going to have to be political: if your view is that what the NSA is doing isn’t acceptable, I think contacting congressmen, petitioning, and campaigning are the right steps. I’m sure the EFF, ACLU, EPIC and similar organizations will be stepping up their long-running efforts in the near future. Question: Answer: Ball: GCHQ’s phrasing of beating “30” then “300” VPNs suggest it’s done on a case-by-case basis, rather than a blanket capability. It’s also worth noting that just because the NSA can, say, beat SSL in some (or many, or most) cases, it doesn’t mean they can do it all the time, especially as they often seem to circumvent rather than directly beat security. Tor also has its onion methodology. I think Bruce’s take – that Tor makes tracing you harder, rather than impossible – seems a sensible one. Note: Bruce Schneier has been traveling but will be online shortly. James Ball will take questions in the meantime. Question: Answer: Ball: Me too! There are a lot of issues here, not least that the technological capabilities of the NSA have hugely outpaced the efforts of most lawmakers to meaningfully understand them, let alone regulate them. In the environment after 9/11, the agency had a permissive environment to expand its remit, masses more funding, and technological advancements making surveillance possible on a scale never previously imaginable. For privacy advocates, the past decade was essentially the perfect storm. That encroachment happened under three Presidents, from two parties. I don’t think this is a partisan issue. It feels a little like the (apocryphal) tale of a frog in boiling water: if the water is slowly heated, the frog never notices it’s being cooked. A final note is that at a bare minimum we need to hold senior intelligence officials accountable in public, and demand honest answers. Obama’s Director of National Intelligence has been accused of outright lying to Congress, seemingly with no adverse consequences. If you’re looking to increase accountability and transparency, surely you’ve got to start there. Question: Answer: Ball: The short answer is yes – the techniques revealed in the whole NSA Files series are shared with the five eyes nations, as is access to most of the databases of intelligence and communications the agencies collect. Of course, there’s a flipside, which is that (in theory at least) the citizens of the five-eyes nations get a little bit extra protection against being spied on by the others – so perhaps you should be more worried if you’re NOT in the US, UK, Canada, Australia or New Zealand. Hard to say! Question: Answer:  Ball: If the NSA’s internal security was perfect, Edward Snowden would never have been able to leak. We’re essentially lucky he chose to release to the press – and it’s worth remembering he asked for responsible, measured publication, not mass-release – rather than simply sell it to hackers or criminals. If someone in a similar position to Snowden decided to just take what they could and sell it to a foreign government, or criminal gang, would we ever know? It seems unlikely we’d be told. And given the NSA has repeatedly said they don’t know which documents Snowden accessed, maybe they wouldn’t know either. That’s an important, additional, reason to be very concerned about the scope of NSA surveillance and activities, in my view – whatever your take on the need/legitimacy of mass-surveillance in general. Question: Answer: Ball: I think this is a serious risk of what the NSA has been doing: if I ran a US security company, I’d be concerned about my reputation (maybe deservedly so, though) – and I’m sure overseas competition will be stressing their ability to refuse US government requests in their advertising (though maybe their own government have similar programs). That does seem to have been a concern of the NSA and GCHQ. I find that quite telling: if companies are just doing what the government requires, and no more, why such a need for secrecy around it? Why can’t they level? I think the efforts some of the silicon valley firms seem to be making are a good start – though what seems to be happening with Lavabit (a secure email company that shut down) are concerning. Finally: this could be a boost to the free software / open source movement, too. That would be no bad thing. Question:  Answer:  Ball: I can’t speak for the US system, as I don’t know it in detail (if you do, please chip in, in the comments) but in the UK intercept evidence isn’t admissable in court – it can be used as part of an investigation, and to get information which is then obtained ‘again’ by means of a warrant (so it can be used in court), but you can’t use it towards a conviction. All three of the UK’s major political parties have said they want to make intercept evidence available in court, but the intelligence agencies have long opposed it – so far, with success. Question:  Answer:  Ball: ECI stands for “Exceptionally Controlled Information” – it’s another level above top-secret, which keeps information to a very select group of individuals. Question:  Answer:  Ball: I can only really speak on this from the journalists’ perspective, as a reporter, but here I know we’re definitely thinking about what we can do to help make it clear how potential sources can communicate with us safely and securely (something we obviously think about anyway). Obviously it’s something reporters have thought about for a long time, in terms of technical and legal protections (I use things like OTR, GPG email, etc, and have for several years), but I think in the wake of this particular story any responsible reporter at any outlet in the world should be reassessing what they do. I’d like to see outlets doing more to learn about security, train their staff in it, and I’d like to see outside groups doing more to help with training – and building new tools to help. It takes a village, and all that. Question: Answer:  Ball: This touches on a really important issue: if the NSA *have* successfully undermined some universal encryption standards, then they may have indeed made some infrastructure more vulnerable to attacks by foreign governments. That would have been a conscious trade-off in the agency, though possibly one based either on the hope/knowledge that hackers in the Chinese or Russian governments (or gangs) weren’t sophisticated enough to take advantage of the flaws, and would never get to that level, and that they would never get a mole inside the NSA or a contractor who could pass on knowledge of it. That seems like quite a lot of bets to take. I wonder, if more were ever to emerge on what standards were compromised, whether there’d be widespread concern or reprisals. Could the NSA face legal responsibility for leaving institutions open to attack? Note: Bruce Schneier will now begin answering questions Question: Answer: Schneier: I like Tails because it fits on a memory stick and gives me a relatively secure environment on any computer. I don't know Liberte, so I can's comment on it. In general, I don't have any inside knowledge about which applications have been compromised and which are secure. I'm making my best guesses based on what we all now know about the NSA's methods and economic realities. Question: Answer: Schneier: It's a good question. Given 1) that the NSA has repeatedly said that they do not know what documents Edward Snowden has, and 2) that they would not have known he had them had he not gone public, it is reasonable to assume he's not the first. He's the first to go public. Question:  Answer:  Schneier: I wrote about this explicitly here. I believe we still can trust cryptography. The problem is that there is so much between the mathematics of cryptography and the "encrypt" button on your computer, and all of that has been subverted. Question: Answer:  Schneier: Like everything else, it depends on the definition of "trust." Even before any of these Snowden revelations, we knew that the FBI has been collecting wholesale banking data on Americans. And this deliberate weakening of the cryptographic systems that protect Internet banking only put us at greater risk from criminals and other espionage agencies. As to your second question, I talked about how to maintain security here. But what ordinary citizens need to do is to make their voices heard; this will not stop unless we all demand it, loudly and repeatedly. Question:  Answer:  Schneier: I do not know. My guess is that the "breakthrough" is not related to MD5. The cryptanalysis of that was public, and the algorithm is only peripherally involved in confidentiality. And I would certainly suspect the entire CA root structure. Answer to "poisoned CA root question": I don't think we can. Answer to SSL questions: MD5 should have been purged years ago. Question:  Answer:  Schneier: There are many possible motivations. Patriotism. A desire to help. Fear of reprisal if you won't help. Not wanting to engage in an expensive legal battle. I'm sure the NSA promises absolute secrecy; perhaps the possibility of losing market share when it becomes public is so remote that it's not really an issue. Question: Answer:  Schneier: 1. I believe that the algorithms are not fundamentally compromised, only the implementations. I talk about this more here. 2. I don't know. I have no reason to believe that SonicWALL is secure. 3. This is an interesting question. I actually believe that AV is less likely to be compromised, because there are different companies in mutually antagonistic countries competing with each other in the marketplace. While the U.S. might be able to convince Symantec to ignore its secret malware, they wouldn't be able to convince the Russian company Kaspersky to do the same. And likewise, Kaspersky might be convinced to ignore Russian malware but Symanetec would not. These differences are likely to show up in product comparisons, which gives both companies an incentive to be honest. But I don't know. 4. I think it would be completely implausible for the NSA not to pursue both Android and iOS with the same fervor as the rest of the Internet. 5. That's what I wrote about here