9.27pm BST What intelligence about the Syrian opposition is the United States using as it makes plans for war and peace? The Guardian's Raya Jalabi (@RayaJalabi) returns to a curious moment in John Kerry's House hearing Wednesday, when the secretary of state cited a Wall Street Journal report to show the rebels are more moderate in makeup than widely believed (watch Kerry here at 1:38:40). The author of the piece, Elizabeth O'Bagy (whose name Kerry misspelled) of the hawkish Institute for the Study of War, later came under fire for not disclosing in the article (or the newspaper) her links to a pro-opposition lobbyist group, the Syrian Emergency Task Force. O'Bagy has since released a statement saying that she does not participate in the group's political advocacy work. (h/t: @lrozen) What other information is Kerry going on? He seemed to be working from a different briefing book than the Republican congressman who questioned him about the opposition, Raya writes: Mike McCaul, chairman of the Homeland Security committee, asked Kerry to address claims that the "majority of rebel forces are … radical Islamists pouring in from all over the world." Kerry replied, "I just don’t agree that the majority are the bad guys and al-Qaida. That’s just not true." There are about 70-100,000 oppositionists. About, somewhere maybe, 15-25% might be one group or another of what we would deem to be bad guys. There are many different groups ...The general belief is that there is a real, moderate opposition that exists … McCaul responded that in the briefings that he’s attended, the figure was closer to “50% – and rising.”  As Foreign Policy put it this morning, “Who the Syrian rebels are depends on whom you ask.” Charles Lister, a terrorism and insurgency analyst based in London, went on a widely shared Twitter-spree Thursday to make the point that there is no such thing as a monolithic opposition with a certain percentage makeup of "extremists" or "moderates."  The key takeaway from Lister: “one simply CANNOT view the #Syria conflict as 1 single conflict… In the end, no single portion of the opposition is dominant on a nationwide basis. #Syria consists of countless theaters.”  Here follows some of my initial thoughts: Fundamentally, it is far too simplistic in its categorisation of the conflict's dynamics.— Charles Lister (@Charles_Lister) September 5, 2013 In a recently published report, ‘Syria’s military opposition: How effective, united or extremist?” the Washington Institute for Near East Policy paints, in broad terms, a vague picture of the “nature of rebel forces”: The kaleidoscopic nature of the rebel forces makes generalizing about their quality and capabilities very difficult and puts a premium on detailed information about specific units ... Some appear disciplined, well-armed, responsive to their commanders, and tactically competent. Others appear much less so, especially in terms of armament and tactical skill. The rebels come from all strata of Syrian society: wealthy and poor, urban and rural, secular and religious, tribal and urbanized, educated and uneducated, former military and civilian. Many units are local in origin, raised by local people for the defense of a town or village. Some are centered on defectors. Many are religious, though not necessarily radically religious, in orientation. While some Kurdish elements fight alongside them in Aleppo and some Kurds and, perhaps Christians, are in rebel formations, the rebels are overwhelmingly a Sunni Arab army. Rebel units are distributed across a broad ideological spectrum, with secular units at one pole and Salafi jihadists at the other, and most falling between the two. Over time the units have tended to become more Islamic, certainly in religious language, visual symbols, prayer, and general orientation. A major differentiation among Islamic units is between those that are Islamic with a national or Syrian agenda and those with a global jihadist mission. For a closer look at the composition of Syria’s opposition fighters, the UK’s Independent has also recently published: Freedom fighters? Cannibals? The truth about Syria’s rebels, by Aron Lund who has published extensively on Syrian opposition movements. (h/t: @DarthNader) This morning, Foreign Policy put together a brief explainer of what we know about the Syrian rebels. Read it before everything changes – again. – Raya Jalabi Updated at 9.31pm BST