Google's wearable, pervasive technology, Google Glass. Photograph: Justin Sullivan/Getty Images Brighton's one-day dConstruct conference, which took place on Friday, has a reputation for tackling some of the more nuanced and challenging cultural issues which often arise as a result of the proliferation of new technology. Developer Nicole Sullivan gave an excellent talk on managing online bullying and trolls, which felt urgent and timely in light of the horrific harassment of Caroline Criado-Perez by trolls on Twitter - which has finally resulted in her deleting her account. We had playfulness, exemplified by Simone Rebaudengo's delightfully whimsical socially-aware connected toasters, and the charismatic founder of bookmarking service, Pinboard, Maciej Cegłowski, who gave a warm and funny account of his experiences working with the online fan-fiction community. And we heard from Luke Wroblewski, who outlined the challenges of designing interfaces for the now bewildering array of inputs and sensors - microphones, accelerometers, cameras, magnetometers, gyroscopes and GPS receivers – which we have in our mobile devices. Wroblewski ended by giving us a glimpse into the near-future, where wearable devices will use our own heartbeats to establish our identity. An electrocardiogram sensor in prototypes devices, such as Nymi, monitors the wearer's heartbeat, to authenticate who they are. The device can then act as a universal 'key' to unlock hardware of software. The ethical implications of a device that uses our hearts, as a key to unlock our car doors, were not discussed. Make the invisible visible One artistic response to the revelations around surveillance of technologies we rely on daily – and a theme of dConstruct – has been to urge digital designers to "make the invisible visible", with cyborg-anthropologist Amber Case explaining importance of revealing the systems, materials and mechanisms which enable contemporary digital culture. Case, from Portland, who took the stage wearing Google's controversial augmented reality eyewear, Glass. In a spirited historical analysis of wearable technology, which began with the crucial work of artist, Steve Mann, Case discussed persistent architectures, liquid interfaces, the politics of augmented reality, and how location-based games can change our relationship with our urban environment. Case was echoing designer Timo Arnall who spoke at the Improving Reality lectures the day before: "As we increasingly inhabit technical systems, and enact society and culture through them, it seems dangerous to have so little idea, about how these things work. "Making visible material out of technological infrastructure is the first step towards understanding them. What we can't see, we cannot critically evaluate." Photo by Cimm on Flickr. Some rights reserved. User experience designers, and interaction designers, have increasingly been advocating for 'invisible' design, which allows technology to get out of the way, to disappear, enabling 'seamless' interactions between us and our technological devices. But there is a growing critique of this philosophy emerging within both the design and art communities. Pervasive Media Studio's Dan Williams extended this important theme, which runs throughout this month's Brighton Digital Festival, with his gently excoriating presentation Unexpected Item in the Bagging Area. Referencing the legendary Whole Earth Catalog in the 1960s by Stewart Brand - described by Williams as "the Argos catalogue for hippies" - Williams expertly unfolded a story about the unintended consequences that emerge when a new technology is introduced into society. Pervasive surveillance He pointed to the terrifying pervasiveness of surveillance technologies in our lives, drawing on art projects such as the Manifesto for CCTV Filmmakers, which shows how CCTV cameras can be put to creative use, and CV Dazzle by Adam Harvey, which ingeniously illustrates ways we can camouflage ourselves from surveillance and machine vision. Referring to the Critical Engineering Manifesto by Julian Oliver, Gordan Savičić and Danja Vasiliev, Williams called into question the seamless, invisible technological systems which underpin much of our digital culture. Quoting fellow dConstruct alumni, James Bridle, who spoke at dConstruct in 2010, Williams noted: "Those who cannot perceive the network cannot act effectively within it, and are powerless. The job, then, is to make such things visible." The tide of international surveillance scandals, revealed in this newspaper by Edward Snowden, have exposed the deep reach of technological systems into our daily lives. dConstruct was an important reminder that we must better equip ourselves with an understanding of how these systems work, so that we can act more intelligently within them. That starts by making the invisible, visible. • Honor Harger is artistic director of Lighthouse, a digital culture agency based in Brighton. The Brighton Digital Festival runs until the end of September.