10.25am BST European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso delivering his last State of the Union speech today. Photograph: FREDERICK FLORIN/AFP/Getty Images The debate is continuing, and can be followed here or on the BBC Parliament channel. But here's a quick round-up: • José Manuel Barroso has declared that Europe's economic crisis is easing. In hie final State of the Union speech in Strasbourg, the EC president said the panic that gripped the region over the past few years was abating. But politicians need to remain vigilant, and tackle growth and unemployment.Barroso declared: For Europe, recovery is within sight. Let's not overestimate the progress, but neither should we underestimate what has been done. • Barroso added that MEPs have a debt to the region's 26 million unemployed to make sure the fragile recovery does not falter. He cited two priorities -- hammering out a final deal on the next EU budget, and implementing banking union. • And once again, Barroso called for closer political union as a solution to Europe's problems, arguing that; Europe must focus on where it can add most value. It needs to be big on big things and smaller on smaller things. And the EC president also reminded MEPs that 99 year ago, member states were entering years of conflict. Europe must learn the lessons of world war one, he insisted. It is a project of peace. Barroso also cited fighting climate change, achieving closer trade links, and creating a single market for telecoms as priorities for the year ahead.  Coverage starts at 8.12am, with Barroso's conclusion at 9.00am. • The speech did not set the Strasbourg parliament alight. A series of MEPs have criticised Barroso for taking a too-optimistic view. One reminded him that just 31 new jobs were created in Spain last month, while another pointed to beggars on the streets as a sign that social cohesion is unraveling. Reaction starts at 9.05am • And from the eurosceptic wing, Nigel Farage predicted that the euro will die "a very slow and painful death", and was promptly criticised for not doing enough work. See 9.50am onwards.