'Although the party voted overwhelmingly against the introduction of secret courts in civil law last year, Nick Clegg went along with his Tory coalition partners.' Photograph: Christopher Furlong/Getty Images If the Lib Dems really gave a damn about liberty they wouldn't have scheduled the debate on schedule 7 of the Terrorism Act 2000, which saw David Miranda detained at Heathrow, as one of the first items on today's agenda. The conference centre in Glasgow was half-full and the debate completely lacked the conviction that you would expect from a truly liberal assembly. Yes, an overwhelming majority of delegates who attended voted for the safeguards summarised by Andrew Sparrow, which include a requirement that someone cannot be detained without "reasonable grounds for suspecting his involvement in the commission, preparation or instigation of acts of terrorism", but let's not forget that although the party voted overwhelmingly against the introduction of secret courts in civil law last year, Nick Clegg went along with his Tory coalition partners. As a result, we now have closed material procedures in the UK, and ministers now have the power to cover up government failings and wrongdoing. The conference delegates will doubtless leave Glasgow satisfied that they have supported an important principle, but they must know in their hearts that they have a leader who is unlikely to go to the wall on this issue. The chill on the subject of Miranda's rights and Edward Snowden's revelations, which I wrote about a couple of weeks ago, has spread through every party in Westminster and every department. The crisis of scrutiny and the alarming absence of proper democratic representation in parliament, where the public's interest against the state is coherently represented by MPs, will not be affected by a few Liberal Democrats voting for a change in terror laws, especially as the party leadership was not in evidence in the conference hall. The vote has no more worth than a publicity stunt. Of course, the delegates believe passionately in what they were saying, but the leadership doesn't get it. By some accounts, Clegg relies on the briefing he gets from civil servants on the Snowden revelations and he simply hasn't absorbed the profound implications of what has been termed by David Rothkopf in the FT as the US and UK's "cyber imperialism". There is no major Lib Dem figure demanding that the state's surveillance and terror powers be reviewed. Indeed, I'd guess that there are more well-known Republicans in the US voicing concern about NSA's attack on privacy than there are Lib Dems prepared to speak trenchantly about the powers granted to police and intelligence agencies by the abysmal Blair regime. As Conservative civil liberties campaigner David Davis has asked, what are the Liberal Democrats for, if they are not primarily for liberty and democracy? It really is hard to know, especially now that party is focused almost exclusively on retaining some power after the next election. The very nature of this extended flirtation with both major parties means that Nick Clegg is unlikely to come out fighting for these hugely important principles. I can hear Clegg's advisers muttering that he stopped the communications data bill, but lets not forget also that when the draft bill was published he reportedly couldn't see a problem with the measures for interception of private communications. If Clegg returns to the Cabinet Offices, where the deputy prime minister is billeted, and insists that the terrorism laws are indeed changed in line with the wishes of his party conference, I will take all this back. But right now, forgive me if I remain thoroughly sceptical.