Top eight stories on MediaGuardian BBC urged to do more for young people Corporation told to do more for 2.1 million children aged four to 12 who watch BBC1 and BBC2 but not CBeebies or CBBC Sunday People digital project gathers pace Trinity Mirror's Sue Douglas leading plans for seven-day product to be launched ahead of paper's print revamp Daily Telegraph wraps up £400,000 Lloyds ad Paper understood to have charged about £400,000 for dummy cover, with sponsorship of comment pages worth even more BBC must cut senior managers, says Patten BBC Trust chairman backs director general's plan to reduce senior staff from 2.5% of workforce to around 1% by 2015 Ex-Evening Standard editor praises Brian Sewell despite his 'shrewish' jibe Veronica Wadley says she saved the paper's art critic from the sack, despite his memoirs claiming 'no one respected her' David Thomas, the man who trained a generation of journalists Tribute to news agency boss who once defied a media tycoon Channel 4 show hopes to 'reclaim sex from porn' Part of Channel 4's Real Sex season, Sex Box invites couples to have sex in an opaque cube before being interviewed by Mariella Frostrup and an expert panel BBC Breakfast rejects guest over her views on unpaid internships She is dropped from programme after catching train to studios Top comment on MediaGuardian Mobile advertising: publishers aim to ring up profits Sun experiments with in-app ads in users' timeline, while new US exchange sparks interest by offering location-based sales Today's headlines The Guardian Breaking Bad leads Emmys winners. P3 Tesco to launch Hudl tablet. P3 BlackBerry agrees $4.7bn sale. P8 Paul Gascoigne fitted spy devices to trace hackers. P18 Apple clocks up 9m new iPhone sales. P28 Daily Telegraph Sex scenes in TV's Doctors investigated. P2 Faked fingerprint can fool iPhone security. P2 Downton Abbey fans upset by the amount of ads shown during breaks. P3 Lord Grade reveals Sir Bruce Forsyth insisted changes should be made to the Strictly Come Dancing set. P3 Sex in a box: Channel 4's latest show to shock. P7 Only golden oldies make perfect TV. P7 Rolf Harris appears in court on child sex offences. P17 BlackBerry forced to accept £4.7bn cut-price deal. B1, B3 Twitter signs advert deal with US broadcaster. B3 New iPhone's sales hit 9m. B3 Tesco enters tablet market. B3 Financial Times BlackBerry agrees $4.7bn sale. P1 Tories urge investigation into Damian McBride. P2 Lex on BlackBerry shares. P16 Apple clocks up 9m new iPhone sales. P17 Chinese social network Renren runs out of steam. P21 Microsoft to launch new tablets. P21 Tesco to launch Hudl tablet. P22 The Times Rolf Harris in court on sex charges. P8 Emmys snub as US 'hipsters' fall out of love with Downton Abbey. P9 Old favourites provide perfect night in for British public. P9 Eurovision cleans up its act to avoid vote-rigging scandal. P32 WikiLeaks hacked off over Assange film. P35 Billionaire to save BlackBerry. P39 The Independent Rolf Harris plans not guilty plea to 13 sex offence charges. P5 Eurovision jurors named and shamed to fight corruption. P13 How dolphin-cam will help BBC to capture secrets of life underwater. P13 Can TV ever take sex seriously without titillation? P17 The Emmys is a match for the Oscars both in style and substance. P37 BlackBerry sale sees $75bn wiped from value in five years. P51 Ken Clarke's ex-adviser joins Daily Mail board. P55 i Rolf Harris to deny nine indecent assault charges. P11 Couple to have sex live on Channel 4 show - but not on camera. P19 New BBC spycams used to track aquatic life. P22 Can TV ever discuss sex seriously. P22 BlackBerry agrees sale to consortium after $1bn loss. P40 Former special adviser to Ken Clarke joins Daily Mail board. P41 Wall Street Journal Europe BlackBerry agrees bid to go private. P1,20 Edward Snowden 'in disguise' in Russia. P4 Tesco to launch Hudl tablet. P19 Twitter wants to make TV pay. P22 Apple clocks up 9m new iPhone sales. P23 Apple's big iPhone weekend. P32 Nokia's Stephen Elop to earn €18.8m to return to Microsoft. P32 Daily Mail Fans' fury as BBC threatens to axe The Sky at Night. P3 Rolf Harris in court on sex abuse charges. p5 James Purnell under pressure to respond to Damian McBride claims. P6 Tesco to launch Hudl tablet. P20 Classics lead poll of UK's favourite TV shows. P29 Daily Express Child contact ban for Rolf Harris facing sex charges. P5 Downton Abbey hits rating high but flops at the Emmys. P8 Interview with Go Compare advert's operatic tenor. P23 Strictly Come Dancing coverage. P25 Best of British TV is our viewing dream. P27 BlackBerry agrees £2.9bn takeover deal. P51 The Sun Raunchy new TV show will see couples have sex in a box. P6 Four major EastEnders stars to be axed by new boss. P7 Rolf Harris appears in court on child sex charges. P9 Hackers bypass Apple's fingerprint scanner. P17 Nine million new iPhones sold. P17 Tesco launches £60 tablet. P17 Gareth Malone to go head-to-head with Simon Cowell again for Christmas No 1. TV Biz P1 Magician dubbed 'the new Dynamo' gets TV series. TV Biz P4 Daily Mirror Rolf Harris denies nine indecent assaults and four charges of making child sex pictures. P1,9 Vanessa Feltz believes her size is against her on Strictly Come Dancing. P9 Eurovision rules are to change following bribery and corruption claims. P15 New iPhones sold out in three days. P16 Morecombe and Wise and Doctor Who feature in poll of greatest TV shows. P23 Daily Star Old TV shows voted top in fantasy TV poll. P6 Rolf Harris to plead not guilty to 13 sex charges. P7 EastEnders bosses want Barbara Windsor to return to save show. P19 Texco launches cheap seven-inch tablet. P19 Channel 4 bosses under fire for 'lurid' show in which lovers have sex in a studio. P23 Go to MediaGuardian