Obama speaks during a luncheon hosted by United Nations secretary general Ban Ki-moon. Photograph: Mary Altaffer/AP Not for the first time in the past seven decades, the US is wondering just how much benefit it gains from playing host to the United Nations. For a week, the broad avenues that run along New York's East river will be blocked as motorcades and delegations criss-cross the city and converge on the towering headquarters at Turtle Bay. New Yorkers have become accustomed to the annual inconvenience, though that does not stop the grumbling on local radio. More seriously, however, for America's self-image and standing in the world, the famous green marble podium in the general assembly hall, once again provided a launching pad for a tirade against US power. This time the broadside was launched by Dilma Rousseff, the Brazilian president. She got to speak first by dint of Brazil's foresight in chairing the first general assembly, 68 years ago, and she used the concentrate global limelight that privilege brings to lambast the US for the activities of the National Security Agency, as revealed by its former contractor, Edward Snowden. She followed in a long line of foreign leaders who have come to Manhattan to exploit the UN's location to deliver harsh messages at the heart of US economic and cultural might. Nikita Khrushchev famously banged his shoe on the lectern and pledged: "We will bury you." In 2006, it was Hugo Chávez's turn. The Venezuelan leader took to the lectern a day after George W Bush and declared: "The devil came here yesterday, and it smells of sulphur still today." What made Rousseff's speech even more painful to Washington's ears was that it came from a supposed American ally in a strategically vital part of the world, and was delivered while President Obama was waiting in the wings to speak. The buzz left in the chamber by the Brazilian's fulminations distracted attention from the opening lines of Obama's message. By the time the US president reached his passage on Iran, however, the hall was silent. Most general assemblies are pre-scripted affairs with little left at stake for the assembled world leaders to bargain over. This year is different. The outcome of the delicate dance being performed by Washington and Tehran is unknowable. The stand-off over Iranian nuclear aspirations has lasted 11 years and the mistrust, as Obama acknowledged, is deeply ingrained. The tension at the UN is palpable. The most closely watched man in New York this week is the Iranian president, Hassan Rouhani, his every gesture carefully analysed for signs of change and reconciliation. Iranian delegations to the UN are always exotic. They come from a country that has had no diplomatic relations with the US for 34 years and which is becoming more unfamiliar as time passes. Rouhani's predecessor, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, played out the sense of alienation with bizarre performances, casting doubt on the Holocaust and insisting that there were no homosexuals in Iran. By comparison, Rouhani cannot help but soothe. He has arrived in town with a lighter footprint. In 2012, Ahmadinejad caused outrage back in his impoverished and embattled homeland by taking nearly 140 people with him. It became a scandal and the subject of a parliamentary debate. Anxious to emphasise the differences from his predecessor, Rouhani appears to have taken a relatively modest number of people with him, perhaps half the size of Ahmadinejad. The entourage includes an Iranian Jewish MP, Siamak Moreh Sedgh, another sharply drawn distinction from Ahmadinejad's rants. As Rouhani flew into New York, huge symbolic importance was being piled on the issue of whether he would shake hands with Obama at the UN, marking the first such encounter between leaders of their countries since the revolution. The first opportunity for a meeting came at Tuesday's official lunch, at which Obama was sitting alongside the UN secretary general, Ban Ki-moon. But Rouhani did not sit down for tuna tartar and veal ossobuco with his fellow leaders, perhaps preferring to keep the global focus on what he had to say. The UN general assembly has many detractors, who point to the millions of dollars spent on indulging the vanity of the planet's leaders and their tendency to declaim at much length. But, sometimes, like this year, it serves as a reminder that the world needs somewhere to meet, and when they have something new to say to each other, it can make for powerful drama.