Labour MP Bernie Grant wearing African dress for the Queen's speech in 1996. Photograph: Graham Turner • "You can't just scream 'terrorism' and use it as an excuse for Orwellian snooping," said the ever wise Stephen Fry on Tuesday. He was referring to the Edward Snowden revelations. But one wonders how those words were received within Scotland Yard. For they're not above using terror as a bit of a cover when it suits. In an ideal world, it seems, they would be prepared to grasp the spirit of the Freedom of Information Act and discuss what – if any – undercover operations they ran on the late Tottenham MP Bernie Grant. But they can't in this bad old world because to do so might hinder the fight against terrorism. And they're serious. That's the problem. • A fair few risible assertions in the lengthy refusal by the Met to come clean about whether it had the MP or his widow Sharon in its sights, but this is perhaps the best of them: "In this current environment, where there is a possibility of increased threat of terrorist activity, providing any details even to confirm or deny that any information exists could assist an extremist faction which would undermine the safeguarding of national security." It would "enable those engaged in criminal or terrorist activity to identify the focus of policing activity and any tactics that may or may not be deployed". They might "gain an upper hand and awareness of policing decisions used during investigations". Disclosure might breach the Data Protection Act. It might interfere with ongoing inquiries. It could interfere with the "duty of care to all members of the public". Here, there is every reason one can think of to keep shtoom. Four things worth remembering. Bernie Grant died 13 years ago. We already know that there was at least one file on him. Scotland Yard will be in trouble if found to have been spying on a sitting MP. This saga is far from over. • Take a moment, meanwhile, to think of Godfrey "Eight Pints" Bloom, who has been stood aside by Ukip for conduct unbecoming, and will see out his term in Brussels as an independent MEP. He will retain his Ukip membership card. He may occasionally spark outrage with more blimpish flights of sexism and racial bon mots such as "bongo bongo land". But the thrill is gone and things will never be the same. How did it happen? Many will say that he was always a car crash waiting to occur, and he says "new Ukip" is "not really right for me any more". But interesting to note that this time last week, the man who said he never drank less than eight pints in a single sitting was on BBC Three Counties Radio, boasting that one of the things that drove him as a politician was the ability – perhaps the need – to continually bait Guardian journalists. It's not that we deliberately hexed him after that, but people do jeopardise the future saying that sort of thing. Events progressed; the trajectory all can see. • It's not just the loss of a distinctive voice; for one is sure that Godfrey will not be silent. It is just a calamity of timing. For after the bongo bongo farrago, things were very much on the up for Eight Pints. He was heralded by the Mail as a trenchant – if inelegant – voice for middle England. This week would have seen publication of his memoir, describing his life and political philosophies, with the mooted title: A Guinea a Minute. He has now taken back the manuscript to add a section on his fall from grace. There were bookings from Question Time, Any Questions, Have I Got News for You – all or some of which might now be imperilled. He was particularly looking forward to a monthly platform offered by the left-leaning Mirror – a chance to go behind enemy lines – but that unpaid slot depended on his place as the voice of Ukip. Now he is merely the voice of Godfrey. The Icarus of Yorkshire and the Humber, some will say. • Finally, a tip for Kindle shoppers. There's Power Trip, Damian McBride's tale of power, lies, sex and skulduggery. And there's The Power Trip, Jackie Collins's "sexy, sun-drenched thriller set on a state-of-the-art luxury yacht": a tale of power, lies, sex and, yes, skulduggery. Do buy the right one. Twitter: @hugh_muir