Guardian News & Media (GNM) has today unveiled a new advertising campaign for Guardian Jobs. The campaign, which has been devised by award-winning creative agency Bartle Bogle Hegarty (BBH), aims to position Guardian Jobs as the forward-thinking job solution for both recruiters and candidates with the new endline 'Smarter People. Smarter Searches'. The creative introduces a playful new mascot for the brand, created by the renowned illustrator Al Murphy, which will also feature on the Guardian Jobs website. The marketing drive begins today (Thursday 26 September) with a two-week outdoor media campaign, run by CBS, across London Underground stations. It will also run across the Guardian, the Observer and theguardian.com, as well as in recruitment trade press. The campaign will be supported by promotional activity including sampling of the Guardian and branded giveaways of Guardian Jobs tote bags and fliers at key London transport hubs. Helen Bird, Sales Director, Guardian Jobs, said: "It's incredibly exciting to be going out into the market with such a fun and eye-catching campaign. Guardian Jobs is an innovative, cross-platform solution with a huge digital reach, which uniquely allows us to reach that elusive and all-important passive jobseeking audience. This creative is very different to anything we've done in the past and gives our brand a fresh new look and feel that we hope will appeal to a wide range of switched-on jobseekers." David Kolbusz, Deputy Executive Creative Director, BBH, said: "Job searching can be a pretty daunting prospect. We wanted to create something that would bring a bit more humour and delight to the search. This campaign speaks to job seekers and recruiters as people, not just potential employees and employers. Hopefully it makes a change from the dry, technical world that often categorises the category." -ends- Notes to editors A selection of the campaign creative can be downloaded here: https://sendit-uk.bartleboglehegarty.com/message/y1jORxYNxBNbrh0NmYQXyH About Guardian News & Media Guardian News & Media (GNM) publishes theguardian.com, the third largest English-speaking newspaper website in the world (comScore, August 2013). Since launching its US and Australia digital editions in 2011 and 2013 respectively, traffic from outside of the UK now represents over two-thirds of the Guardian's total digital audience. In the UK, GNM publishes the Guardian newspaper six days a week and the world's oldest Sunday newspaper, The Observer. The newspapers were this year named the most trustworthy, accurate and reliable newspapers in the UK. The Guardian, which was first published in 1821, is most recently renowned for its agenda-setting NSA and GCHQ revelations following disclosures by whistleblower Edward Snowden, its globally acclaimed investigation into phone hacking and the launch of its groundbreaking digital-first strategy in 2011, and its trailblazing partnership with WikiLeaks in 2010. About BBH In 2012, BBH was the winner of nine UK and international agency of the year titles including Campaign, Marketing and Creative Review Agency of the Year and Adweek USA Ad of the Year for the Guardian "3 Little Pigs". In the first half of 2013 the agency has won the Grand Prix at Creative Circle, Gold at the One Show and the Grand Clio in the USA. BBH also won the British Arrows BTAA Agency of the Year for a record 7th time. In 2013 the agency has won new assignments from Pirelli, Philadelphia, Clark's shoes, Christies, Tele2 and Bang & Olufsen. For more information please contact: Guardian News & Media press office on: 020 3353 3696 / media.enquiries@theguardian.com, or Isobel Barnes, BBH London on: isobel.barnes@bbh.co.uk or 0207 453 4395.