In a joint statement of record to the committee, Clapper, Alexander and Cole said the intelligence community was willing to "consider" some changes to the its program of phone record collection and the secret surveillance court that grants surveillance warrants, Guardian Washington correspondent Paul Lewis (@PaulLewis) reports. Paul is in the hearing room: In their statement, the trio said they were "open to a number of ideas that have been proposed in various forms" relating to the routine trawl of millions phone records of Americans under section 215 of the Patriot Act. Specifically, they said they would "consider statutory restrictions" on their ability to query the data they gather and disclosing publicly how often they use the system. However, there was no suggestion in the written submission that they would contemplate any infringement on the bulk collection and storage of the phone records, a proposal contained in bills being put forward in the House of Representatives and Senate. "To be clear, we believe the manner in which the bulk telephony metadata collection program has been carried out is lawful, and existing oversight mechanisms protect both privacy and security," they state. "However, there are some changes that we believe can be made that would enhance privacy and civil liberties as well as public confidence in the program, consistent with our national security needs." The intelligence chiefs and deputy attorney general also said they "would be open to discussing" legislation under which the foreign intelligence surveillance act (FISA) court would "at its discretion" solicit the views of some kind of independent figure in cases that raise broader civil liberties issues. This seems to fall short of the draft legislation calling for the appointment of a "constitutional advocate", which senators hope will be an independent figure who inserts an adversarial mechanism into court proceedings to challenge the government. Throughout the submission, Alexander, Clapper and Cole adopt a defensive stance, saying they have gone to great lengths over the last three months to be more transparent, declassifying documents, participating in White House-commissioned reviews into surveillance powers and setting up a website about their monitoring activities. The three men repeatedly criticize the media for reports based on disclosures made by former NSA contractor Edward Snowden – although, of course, he is not named. The submission states that his disclosures "caused significant harm to national security" and, they said, "undermined public confidence in our efforts to protect Americans' privacy".