5.16pm BST Appelbaum says that the NSA is likely to be ahead of academic analysis. "I think the NSA may have broken RC4.. something like IPSEC which has a NIST standard may be just as bad or worse. And proprietary environment it may be worse. "In my computing hardware I drill the microphones out of my laptop." (A pause in the room while people consider that.) "How do we resist this? If I'm going to meet someone then I need to work on something that's forward-secret... it's called PANDA.. we want a way to have a shared secret and meet in a forward-secret way to do a key exchange. Because we know they look for particular keywords. The moment you connect to the internet then you reveal all your information, your presence." (Complex explanation follows of how they generate an encrypted tag using Diffie-Helman (encryption) and then go forward and have a key exchange (for SSL) over the Tor network.) "I'm pretty confident that the way they would and could beat Tor would be via the web browser... " He tails off: doesn't want to describe something there. "Trying to save email is a lost cause apart from how it's distributed; PGP I trust but the user interface is a nightmare." His aim is "get rid of plaintext on the internet wherever possible... Google is starting to encrypt its own backbone, the internal fibres.. so even if the NSA was sniffing stuff in there it would get nothing... big networks need to adopt that.  "I think if you're working on these things.. have one machine which is completely routed through Tor and never use the web browser on that. And then use another machine for browsing. A web browser is a nightmare of code. It's really quite, quite, quite scary. Perhaps transfer URLs via QR codes. (That's quite a warning from Appelbaum: web browsers are unsafe with the NSA in sight.) "All the major corporations which control DNSSec.. they're beholden to the NSA. I met a person who works in a security company, and they were told that whatever they do for their customers they're required to turn over their entire work product to the agency, without telling their customer or shareholders. The company has these privacy and non-disclosure agreements - and the state has privatised computer security researchers' work. "I've heard that from two sources but haven't seen any documents about it. But what I see in other things is that that seems to be what they would do. In Bullrun [cryptographic subversion] they're going to want data from companies.. via business record requests. "Free software is one of the only ways to move forward, but we need verifiable hardware too. And that's really difficult. Intel's random number generator.. I wouldn't really trust that, get lots of sources of entropy [for random number generation]."