Guardian News & Media (GNM) has today announced three new hires to join the commercial team of the Guardian's digital edition in Australia. Duncan Arthur, previously Country Manager for SAY Media, has been appointed Commercial Director and starts with immediate effect. Duncan will oversee all commercial revenue activity in Australia, including brand partnerships, and Guardian Australia's relationship with external sales house Inception Digital. Tony Bell joins as Brand Partnerships Manager, Guardian Labs. Tony will manage the brand partnerships team in Australia and will be responsible for developing bespoke brand solutions for clients. Tony brings with him excellent experience from Ninemsn where he was previously Business Group Manager, and also SAY Media. He will take up his new position this week. Anna Cotton has been appointed Brand Partnerships Executive and will work closely with both Duncan and Tony to develop branded content solutions for clients. Anna recently returned to Sydney from GNM in London where she was Commercial Manager for Guardian Professional, focusing on education and culture professional networks. Guardian Labs - which will be officially launch later this year - will mark a bold new direction for the Guardian as it continues in its ambition to build on its solid reputation in delivering new models and ideas to a global audience. Guardian Labs will focus on innovative client collaboration and cross-media partnerships in order to drive engaging, digital-first solutions for a broad range of clients. Ian McClelland, Managing Director, Guardian Australia said: "Duncan, Tony and Anna are three outstanding hires for GNM and I am delighted to have them on board. Their extensive experience comes at an incredibly exciting time for Guardian Australia as we continue to build on the fantastic reception we've had since we launched, and as we look to pioneer innovative, market-leading solutions for our clients here in Australia." -ends- About Guardian News & Media Guardian News & Media (GNM) publishes theguardian.com, the third largest English-speaking newspaper website in the world (comScore, August 2013). Since launching its US and Australia digital editions in 2011 and 2013 respectively, traffic from outside of the UK now represents over two-thirds of the Guardian's total digital audience. In the UK, GNM publishes the Guardian newspaper six days a week and the world's oldest Sunday newspaper, The Observer. The newspapers were this year named the most trustworthy, accurate and reliable newspapers in the UK. The Guardian, which was first published in 1821, is most recently renowned for its trailblazing partnership with WikiLeaks in 2010, its globally acclaimed investigation into phone hacking and the launch of its groundbreaking digital-first strategy in 2011 and its agenda-setting NSA and GCHQ revelations following disclosures by whistleblower Edward Snowden. The Scott Trust Ltd The ultimate owner of the Guardian is The Scott Trust, which was originally created as a trust in 1936 to safeguard the title's journalistic freedom. In 2008 it was replaced by a limited company with the same core purpose of the original trust: to secure the financial and editorial independence of the Guardian in perpetuity, while its subsidiary aims are to champion its principles and to promote freedom of the press in the UK and elsewhere. Other than to cover expense, The Scott Trust takes no dividend from the group's businesses, whose profits are instead reinvested to sustain journalism that is free from commercial or political interference. For further information please contact: Guardian News & Media Press Office +44 20 3353 3696 media.enquiries@theguardian.com