Guardian Faber is pleased to announce the acquisition of The Snowden Files: The True Inside Story of the World's Most Wanted Man by Luke Harding, scheduled for publication in Spring 2014. Investigative journalism at its best, The Snowden Files tells the story of the individuals behind the biggest leak in history and the forces that tried to stop them. It began with a tantalising, anonymous email: "I am a senior member of the intelligence community..." No name, no job title, no further details. What followed was the most spectacular intelligence breach in history: leaking highly sensitive secrets from the heart of US power. The Snowden Files is about how a 29-year-old contractor working for the top secret National Security Agency became the world's most wanted man. It is about the journalists who stumbled into the story of their lives and published against the odds. Moving between Hong Kong and Hawaii, London to New York, the NSA and GCHQ, award-winning Guardian journalist Luke Harding relates a high-octane account of secrets and defiance, integrity and intrigue. Branded a traitor and hailed a hero, infuriating some and inspiring others, Snowden took extraordinary risks to reveal what he knew. It shocked the world and sparked global debate. This is the story they didn't want you to read. -ends- Luke Harding is an award-winning foreign correspondent with the Guardian. He has reported from Delhi, Berlin and Moscow and has also covered wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. He is the author of MafiaState and co-author of WikiLeaks: Inside Julian Assange's War on Secrecy (2011) and The Liar: The Fall of Jonathan Aitken (1997), nominated for the Orwell Prize. The film rights to Wikileaks were sold to Dreamworks and the film, The Fifth Estate, comes out next week. He has also written for the magazine Granta. He lives in Hertfordshire with his wife, the freelance journalist Phoebe Taplin, and their two children. Faber are handling all rights, excluding film. Please contact Lizzie Bishop at lizzieb@faber.co.uk Film rights are being handled by the Guardian. Please contact robert.hahn@theguardian.com For further information, please contact: Anna Pallai, Publicity Director Non-Fiction on 020 7927 3884 or email annap@faber.co.uk