Link to video: The Fifth Estate trailer: watch Benedict Cumberbatch as Julian Assange in the Wikileaks thriller David Cameron has hailed Benedict Cumberbatch's portrayal of the "twitchiness" of Julian Assange and expressed qualified support for the early work of the WikiLeaks founder. The Fifth Estate Production year: 2013 Country: Rest of the world Cert (UK): 15 Runtime: 128 mins Directors: Bill Condon Cast: Benedict Cumberbatch, Carice van Houten, Dan Stevens, Daniel Bruhl, David Thewlis, Laura Linney, Peter Capaldi, Stanley Tucci More on this film See if this film is playing near you UK postcode: The prime minister, who described Cumberbatch's performance in The Fifth Estate as brilliant, said WikiLeaks had done well in its early period when it exposed corruption in Africa. But he said that in its later period WikiLeaks had put lives at risk. Cameron was asked to review the Fifth Estate before an appearance on The Agenda on ITV on Monday night. He managed to see the first part of the film. The PM told ITN's political editor, Tom Bradby, who presents The Agenda: "Benedict Cumberbatch – brilliant, fantastic piece of acting. The twitchiness and everything of Julian Assange is brilliantly portrayed." But Cameron said he felt uneasy that in the film Assange appears to be more concerned about the fate of people who leaked documents to WikiLeaks – an apparent reference to Chelsea Manning – rather than people whose security may have been jeopardised by the leaks. The prime minister said: "There is an interesting bit at the beginning when he says some of these documents are confidential, people's lives are at risk and of course he is thinking of the people who have leaked them. Actually you also need to think about the people whose lives are at risk because they have been leaked. In the bit of the film I saw that didn't come out enough. But it makes you think." But the PM, who campaigned strongly in favour of open government while in opposition at the time that WikiLeaks first started to make an impact, said he had some understanding of the motives for its early work. Asked whether he had sympathy for the way in which it had exposed corruption, he said: "Yes, you do feel sympathy for them because some of the things they uncover in Africa and elsewhere – you think it is great that information has been revealed. "Transparency, sunlight is a great disinfectant. Transparency about information and where money is spent and how it is spent – this helps keep governments and politicians honest. So it is a good thing." But Cameron questioned what he called the "huge dumps of information" by WikiLeaks. He said: "But later on the film when it gets on to what happened recently where just huge dumps of information – every single telegram they had was made public without thinking of the consequences and huge lives could be put at risk. There is some information that government has to keep secret for national security, for people's safety. I think that needs to be part of the debate too." The film focuses on the collaboration between WikiLeaks and the Guardian. The newspaper, which published leaked war logs from Iraq and Afghanistan and leaked US diplomatic cables, had a policy of seeking to protect the identity of individuals named in sensitive documents. The prime minister rejected suggestions that the subsequent leaking of NSA documents by the US whistleblower Edward Snowden to the Guardian showed that the government was snooping inappropriately on its citizens. Some of the leaked documents covered the work of GCHQ in Britain: Cameron said: "We have very good rules in this country. If a telephone call is going to be listened into that has to be signed off by the home secretary personally. There are very good safeguards in place. "When you get to be prime minister you ask all the questions about what are the safeguards, what are the rules. I have asked that question a lot and I am satisfied we have pretty strong safeguards in this country. "I thought part of the reaction to the Guardian story was: big surprise, spies found to spy. They do that for a reason which is to help keep us safe. That needs to under proper parliamentary control, proper legal safeguards and I am satisfied that it is." • Ian Katz: What's it like having Downton Abbey pin-up Dan Stevens play you in a film? • Watch the Fifth Estate trailer