The Guardian comes in for criticism in today's coverage by several newspapers of the first public speech by MI5's director-general Andrew Parker. Though he did not directly mention either the paper or the NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden by name, he said that the leaking of GCHQ files has gifted al-Qaeda the chance to evade British security services and "strike at will". Three papers - The Times, Daily Telegraph and Daily Mail - splash on Parker's speech, and all refer to The Guardian and Snowden. The Mail story is headlined "MI5 chief: Guardian has handed gift to terrorists" while the Telegraph carries a sub-deck saying "Guardian release of GCHQ files criticised". In The Times's article, "Spy leaks put Britain in danger, says MI5 chief", the second paragraph states that Parker's attack on The Guardian and Snowden was "scathing." The Mail called it "blistering." It is the Mail that devotes most space to the story, with an inside spread, while taking the opportunity to attack The Guardian, which it views as its enemy. To that end it publishes two pictures of editor Alan Rusbridger, plus a short biography ("Editor in the eye of a storm") and an analysis headlined "The Guardian has produced a 'handbook' for fanatics." This is a claim attributed by the writer, James Slack, to "one government official". It continues: "Whitehall insiders are scornful of the idea that The Guardian and Snowden – who is now holed up in Russia, after a whistle-stop visit to the Chinese territory of Hong Kong – needed to start a debate on state surveillance." The "insiders" are also said to be angry "at the depiction of Snowden as a 'whistleblower' by The Guardian." Slack adds: "What most disturbs security officials is the knowledge that there are thousands more documents still in the possession of The Guardian, which – despite being warned of the grave threat to national security – continues to publish Snowden's material." The Guardian report, "GCHQ surveillance plays vital role in fight against terrorism, says MI5 chief", acknowledges that Parker's "robust defence of the techniques used by Britain's intelligence agencies" was an attack on Snowden: "Some of Parker's strongest remarks appeared to be directed at the whistleblower who gave thousands of classified intelligence files to the Guardian." The Independent report, "Snowden leaks 'put UK at grave risk of al-Q'aida attack' makes only a passing reference to The Guardian. The Financial Times's report said: "Over the past three months, Mr Snowden and the Guardian have argued that the former NSA contractor has shed unprecedented light on the scale and sophistication of surveillance by both the NSA and GCHQ and the secret laws underpinning such programmes." It quotes Parker as saying: "We only apply intrusive tools and capabilities against terrorists and others threatening national security… In some quarters there seems to be a vague notion that we monitor everyone and all their communications, browsing at will through people's private lives… That is, of course, utter nonsense."