Sir Andrew Parker, head of MI5, who said information leaked by Edward Snowden 'hands the advantage to the terrorists'. Photograph: MI5/PA Sir Andrew Parker made an important speech on Tuesday night. In his first public appearance since he took over as head of MI5, he set out the challenges facing the service, the limitations of what it can do, and the dangers it faces. Prominent among them were the potential damage being done by a man he did not name, whose files had provided stories for a media organisation he did not mention. You didn't have to be a cryptographer at GCHQ, whose proxy he was on Tuesday night, to know his targets were Edward Snowden and the Guardian. As head of the domestic secret service, Parker's opinion is significant. But as a 30-year veteran of MI5, Parker is unlikely to consider himself the high priest of objectivity in any debate about surveillance and privacy. He said as much on Tuesday. "Unfashionable as it might seem, that is why we must keep secrets secret," he told his audience. "And why not doing so causes such harm." Parker's position – which is understandable given where he works and what he does – is that the public doesn't have a right to know anything that MI5 deems sensitive. And it certainly doesn't have a need to know about the scope and scale of the surveillance programmes revealed by Snowden. In this respect, Parker is more old school than the old school. But this is not the only opinion circulating among the intelligence community. In recent days, a former head of MI5, Dame Stella Rimington, acknowledged her old agency needed to be more transparent. A former head of America's National Security Agency, General Michael Hayden, said much the same thing. Last week he told an audience in London: "It's clear to me now that in liberal democracies the security services don't get to do what they do without broad public understanding and support. And although the public cannot be briefed on everything, there has to be enough out there so that the majority of the population believe what they are doing is acceptable." At the moment, there isn't enough out there. The indignation of the intelligence agencies about Snowden's leaks are being increasingly accompanied by two charges. The first is that the revelations have made it easier for terrorists; and the second is that the files are now in the hands of foreign intelligence services. On Tuesday night, Parker set out his fear, but in a way that presented it as fact: "Such information hands the advantage to the terrorists. It is the gift they need to evade us and strike at will." Parker did not present any evidence to support this. He can't. And those who doubt the claim cannot disprove it either. But there are voices who doubt the extent of the "gift" Parker describes. Three weeks ago, Nigel Inkster, former deputy chief of MI6, played down the potential damage. "I sense that those most interested in the activities of the NSA and GCHQ have not been told much they didn't already know or could have inferred," he said. In an opinion piece for the New York Times, security specialist Bruce Schneier said: "The argument that exposing these documents helps the terrorists doesn't even pass the laugh test; there's nothing here that changes anything any potential terrorist would do or not do." Last week, the New York Times reported Snowden's disclosures had caused less damage than another self-inflicted leak. Apparently, there has been a "sharp drop in terrorists' use of a major communications channel" after the US press revealed American spies had intercepted messages between two senior al-Qaida commanders in the Middle East. Nevertheless, even these opinions, and the story, don't prove anything either. Parker's view counts, but he also knows the arguments about the damage that has been done are circular and unresolvable. And the same can be said for the assertion that foreign intelligence agencies are now in possession of the documents Snowden took when he was working inside the NSA. Perhaps the Russians and the Chinese do now have the files. But if they have obtained them, they have managed a feat that has so far eluded the combined efforts of the British and American intelligence communities. Four months after this saga started, they still don't know how many files Snowden took. Whether he is regarded as a whistleblower, a traitor, a self-serving twerp – as Rimington described him – or a hero, Snowden knew about encryption, and he knew how to keep things safe. Those people who believe the public does have a right to know about British and American surveillance programmes might feel more sympathetic to Parker if the scrutiny and oversight regimes had more muscle than they do now. But Parker made clear on Tuesday night he was happy with the current arrangements. He believes the intelligence and security committee (ISC) has enough powers to do its job. The chair of the ISC, the former Conservative foreign secretary Sir Malcolm Rifkind, seems to agree. Which must make him the only chair of a parliamentary scrutiny committee not asking for even more tools to do his job. Yet Rimington acknowledged that this status quo had to be changed. She told the Times last week: "It is very important for our intelligence services to have the kind of oversight that people can have confidence in, so that we can be quite sure that in giving them these powers we know that they are being supervised and scrutinised in the way they use them. And I think that may mean that now is the time to look again at the oversight of our intelligence services."