2.22pm BST • Ed Miliband has said that 90% of people will not benefit from David Cameron's plans to force energy companies to put customers on the lowest tariffs. He revealed the figure at PMQs, where his exchange with David Cameron focused on energy, and in particular on Labour's plan to force companies to freeze bills for 20 months. Cameron says the government is already legislating to make firms put their customers on the lowest tariffs. But Miliband said that 90% of households would not benefit. That is because the legislation giving the energy secretary the power to require suppliers to change a customer's tariff only applies to customers on closed tariffs (those that are no longer available). Only 2.5m customers are on these tariffs, while 27m homes receive energy bills. Miliband said Cameron has no response to Labour's price freeze plan and that Conservatives could not decide whether it was "a good idea or a Communist plot" What is clear is that you are floundering around and you have no answer to Labour’s energy price freeze You didn’t even defend your own policy, which won’t benefit 90% of the country. You have no idea. You say you want to bring energy prices down but can you confirm that energy prices have gone up by £300 since you became prime minister? But Cameron said that Labour's plan was a "gimmick". He accused Miliband of introducing "regulation after regulation, target after target" when he was energy secretary and said that prices were going up as a result. He also said that Labour was committed to a decarbonisation target that would add £125 to every bill in the country. Later Labour's Graham Jones asked Cameron: Why is market intervention in mortgages okay, but market intervention in the energy market is not?  Cameron replied: We are intervening in the mortgage market because banks are failing to provide mortgages so young people can get on the housing ladder. We are also intervening by putting everyone on the lowest energy tariff. What the Leader of the Opposition can't control, although he would like too, is international gas prices. He needs a basic lesson in economics and it sounds like you do too.  • Ed Balls has forced Cameron to correct a claim he made about all married couples on the basic rate of tax benefiting from the transferable tax allowance being introduced by the government. Cameron said: "All married couples paying basic rate tax will benefit from this move." At the end of PMQs Balls, the shadow chancellor, raised a point of order and said Cameron's comment was "simply not true". Cameron then stood up to say the transferable allowance would be available to every basic rate taxpayer. • Cameron has described Balls as "the great election winner" for the Tories. After clarifying what he meant about the transferable tax allowance, Cameron attacked Balls: I stand up for marriage even when he wants to talk it down. I thank him once again for his tenacity, even though he's been proved wrong on every major argument. He's the great election winner for us. Earlier Cameron also mocked Balls for saying he and Miliband would campaign on their experience, track record and credibility. I have to say Mr Speaker that is like the captain of the Titanic running on his safety record. Cameron also said that Miliband's decision to keep Andy Burnham as shadow health secretary in his reshuffle would help the Conservatives. • Cameron has said that Chris Grayling, the justice secretary, has asked the Sentencing Council to review the sentencing guidelines for serious driving offences. • Cameron welcomed a BBC survey showing that people think the quality of some public services has improved over the last five years even though spending has been cut. (See 9.25am.) When I woke up and heard the BBC reporting this, I thought I'd died and gone to heaven for a moment. • Downing Street has endorsed a speech by Andrew Parker in which the new head of MI5 suggested that the leaks by the US whistleblower Edward Snowden had undermined the fight against terrorism. As Nicholas Watt reports, the No 10 spokesman said: "The prime minister thinks it was an excellent speech and we are, as you would expect, always keeping under review the measures that are needed to contribute to keeping our country safe." Parker did not mention Snowden by name in a speech that strongly defended Britain's intelligence agencies. But his remarks appeared to be aimed at the whistleblower who gave thousands of intelligence files to the Guardian that revealed surveillance programmes carried out by GCHQ and its US counterpart, the National Security Agency (NSA). • Consumer groups and unions have condemned plans for inflation-busting hikes in rail fares in England, despite an overhaul of the pricing system intended to curb the biggest rises. • Hugh Grant has said that talks to make parliament's royal charter on press regulation more palatable to newspaper groups are a "betrayal" of promises made by the prime minister to victims of press abuse. • Lord Justice Leveson has said that he  will not interfere in the stand-off between politicians and the press over regulation reforms. As the Press Association reports, he told a Lords committee that it would be "totally wrong" for him to comment on the controversy surrounding proposed changes which are based on his report last year. He also hinted that a planned second part of his inquiry, dealing with phone hacking, may never happen. There are more details on our live blog of the hearing. • The Foreign Office has taken up the case of six UK Greenpeace activists held in Russia on piracy charges with the Russian ambassador. David Lidington, a Foreign Office minister, disclosed more details in a written statement (pdf). • Maria Miller, the culture secretary, has said that some sporting bodies should do more to boost representation of women and ethnic minorities on their governing boards. As the Press Association reports, she told a parliamentary committee that sporting bodies should be "reflective" of the make-up of society at large, and that many of them had "a huge way to go" in recruiting members from minority communities. But she rejected the idea of quotas of women or black board members, and told the House of Lords Olympic Legacy Committee that she was not planning to withhold government cash from organisations with men-only governing bodies.  Updated at 2.25pm BST