Andrew Parker is said to be well known in the Cabinet Office and in the corridors of Whitehall. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images The new head of MI5, Britain's domestic security service, in his first public speech served up a free hit for the Guardian's traditional critics over the publication of leaked documents about the activities of GCHQ, and its US electronic eavesdropping partner, the NSA. In his speech on Tuesday night to a closed meeting at the Royal United Services Institute thinktank, but distributed to national newspapers, Andrew Parker said that publicising "the reach and limits of GCHQ techniques" caused "enormous damage". He continued: "Such information hands the advantage to the terrorists. It is the gift they need to evade us and strike at will". His intervention could prove counter productive, drawing attention, as it did, to the sheer extent of GCHQ and the NSA's ability secretly to monitor personal communications. Even former senior intelligence officers have suggested GCHQ has exaggerated the damage leaks by the former NSA contractor, Edward Snowden, has done to its ability to track down terrorists. There is a widespread view, even among the security and intelligence establishment – Britain's securocracy – that GCHQ has been far too secretive about what it has been getting up to. They say GCHQ did not even tell cabinet ministers and members of the National Security Council about the extent of its eavesdropping, confirming what the former LibDem minister, Chris Huhne , recently told the Guardian. Yet Parker made clear in his speech he thought GCHQ, and by implication MI5, actually need more powers. "Shifts in technology can erode our capabilities. There are choices to be made, including, for example, about how and whether communications data is retained", he said. He added: "It is not, however, an option to disregard such shifts with an unspoken assumption that somehow security will anyway be sustained. It will not. We cannot work without tools". The message was clear: ministers must draw up a new law to cover the interception of internet traffic and other communications. In other words, to make lawful what GCHQ is doing anyway. What GCHQ needs – and MI5 and MI6 – is more effective and credible acccountability. Even serving intelligence chiefs admit privately that the system of Commissioners – normally former senior judges – set up to monitor the activities of the security and intelligence agencies is weak and lacks credibilty. The prime minister-appointed parliamentary Intelligence and Security Committee has yet to show itself to be a credible, independent, oversight body. The value of a truly independent inspector was demonstrated the day after Parker delivered his speech.The independent chief inspector of borders and immigration, John Vine, published a detailed report, warts and all, (though with some passages redacted) about the Home Office's flagship "e-borders" programme. In the end, as I have argued before, it is a matter of trust. Legislation helps but it will not always be able to catch up with the development of intrusive technology. A system of credible, full-time, independent inspectors would help.