Malala Yousafzai is being tipped as a frontrunner for the Nobel peace prize. Photograph: Paul Ellis/AFP/Getty Images Malala Yousafzai, the Pakistani teenage campaigner for girls' education, has won Europe's foremost human rights award, the Sakharov prize, capping an eventful four years that have brought death threats, abuse and an assassination attempt by the Taliban. The 16-year-old, now based in Britain, has become a symbol of unswerving resistance to the Taliban's violent denial of women's rights. The announcement was made in Brussels by Martin Schulz, president of the European parliament, after a meeting of the parliament's political leaders who constitute the jury for the prize. Edward Snowden, the National Security Agency whistleblower on the run in Russia from the US authorities, was shortlisted for the award. Malala is being tipped as a frontrunner for the Nobel peace prize, the winner of which is due to be announced on Friday. "Some 250 million young girls around the world cannot freely go to school. Malala's example reminds us of our duty and responsibility to the right to education for children. This is the best investment for the future, " said Schulz. "The European parliament acknowledges the incredible strength of this young woman. Malala bravely stands for the right of all children to be granted a fair education. This right for girls is far too commonly neglected. Malala has courageously recovered from a Taliban attack and now eloquently advocates through the world for this fundamental and just cause. Let us not forget that Malala is still threatened in Pakistan." Four years ago Malala started campaigning for girls' education rights in Pakistan's conservative Swat valley, where Taliban strictures on women's rights are zealously observed and enforced. Using a pseudonym, she started writing a blog for the BBC's Urdu service and quickly shot to national and international prominence, travelling to the US to deliver speeches at the United Nations and at Harvard. Last year she recovered from an assassination attempt after a Taliban-supporting man in his 20s shot her. Thursday's announcement came a day after the first anniversary of the shooting on 9 October last year. "People are brainwashed," she told the Guardian in an interview published this week. "That's why they do things like suicide attacks and killing people. I can't imagine it – that boy who shot me, I can't imagine hurting him even with a needle. I believe in peace. I believe in mercy. "When someone tells me about Malala, the girl who was shot by the Taliban – that's my definition for her – I don't think she's me. Now I don't even feel as if I was shot. Even my life in Swat feels like a part of history or a movie I watched. Things change. God has given us a brain and a heart which tell us how to live." Malala is currently in Britain with her father, Ziauddin, who earlier set up a school in Pakistan with facilities for girls and boys and has long been an activist for children's education, and it is not clear if or when she will return home. She is based in Birmingham, and is studying for her GCSEs.