David Cameron said newspapers should think about their responsibility for keeping the country safe. Photograph: Rex David Cameron has accused the Guardian of harming the fight against terrorism by publishing what was in effect "stolen information" about the spying powers of GCHQ, but revealed he is open to suggestions about how the security services could be better governed. The prime minister said newspapers should "think about their responsibilities" for helping to keep Britain safe after the Guardian ran a series of stories based on leaks from the US whistleblower Edward Snowden. The stories revealed the extent of secret surveillance programmes carried out by GCHQ and its US counterpart, the National Security Agency (NSA). Alan Rusbridger, editor-in-chief of the Guardian, has defended the newspaper's reporting of files leaked by Snowden, saying it highlighted formidable technologies "beyond what Orwell could have imagined". However, Cameron's comments back up the stance of Sir Andrew Parker, the new head of MI5, who suggested this week the leaks had undermined the fight against terrorism. Speaking in York, Cameron said: "When you get newspapers who get hold of vast amounts of data and information that is effectively stolen information and they think it is they think it's OK to reveal this, I think they have to think about their responsibilities and are they helping to keep our country safe." "To be fair to the Guardian, when I sent the cabinet secretary and the national security adviser to go and see them to tell them about how dangerous it was for them to hold this information they agreed to have a whole lot of it destroyed. "They have understood it on some occasions but I think they need to show understanding about this issue because it does go to our ability to fight terrorism." Asked why the National Security Council was not told about GCHQ's secret surveillance programmes called Tempora and Prism, Cameron said ministers were free to ask any questions they wanted of the UK's spying chiefs. He did not deny allegations by Chris Huhne, the former energy secretary, that the council was not briefed. "Anyone on the National Security Council is fully able to go and speak with the intelligence agencies, quiz them about the work that they do, to ask for presentations," he said. "As prime minister, I've been to Cheltenham to see what GCHQ do … I meet regularly with the head of MI5 to discuss his work. Any member of the National Security Council, frankly any member of the cabinet, is able … to get access to this information and they are able to go and have those conversations." Cameron was also asked whether people should read the Guardian after it published the Snowden leaks. He said: "People can read any newspaper they want. There are days when I recommend reading absolutely no newspaper at all." He defended oversight of the security services but said he was "happy to listen" to suggestions about how it could be improved. "I am satisfied the work these agencies do is not only vital but it is properly overseen," he said. "That is what this debate needs to be about. Do we want to have well-funded, intelligent services that help keep people safe? "If people want to suggest improvements about how they are governed and looked after I am very happy to listen to those, but as far as I can see we have a very good system."