Top eight stories on MediaGuardian Guardian was 'entirely correct' to publish NSA stories, says Vince Cable Business secretary confirms Nick Clegg is to launch review of oversight of intelligence agencies Foreign editors back Guardian over NSA On Thursday, the Daily Mail described the Guardian as 'The paper that helps Britain's enemies'. We showed that article to many of the world's leading editors. This is what they said PM criticises Guardian but 'will listen to suggestions' on GCHQ oversight David Cameron accuses Guardian of publishing 'stolen information' in effect in stories based on Edward Snowden leaks Doctor Who's 'lost' 1960s episodes found BBC says nine episodes not seen on TV for 40 years – including The Web of Fear – were found in Nigerian TV studio David Miliband criticises Daily Mail Former foreign secretary says he trusts the British people will understand the truth regarding 'hateful' attack on father Ralph Leveson distances himself from royal charter Judge hopes his recommendations are not lost in a political row over setting up watchdog Clegg calls for press to show perspective Deputy PM says royal charter will simply set up system checking independence of newspapers' self-regulation every three years Barack Obama's efforts to control leaks 'most aggressive since Nixon' Administration's tactics, which include using Espionage Act to pursue leakers, have had chilling effect on accountability – study Top comment on MediaGuardian Press regulation: Brian Leveson's obstinate tour de force Sam Jones: Judge tells parliamentary committee that sharing his thoughts on how to break deadlock would be hitting 'a red line' Today's headlines The Guardian NSA revelations – analysis and foreign editors react. P9, 10, 11, 12, 13 Leveson distances himself from plan for royal charter. P17 Lost Doctor Who episodes found in Nigeria. P21 BT returns to mobile phone business with EE deal. P35 Three companies behind brand Beckham make £4m in profits. P35 Daily Telegraph Long lost Doctor Who episodes found in Nigeria. P3 Leveson appears in front of a committee of MPs. P20 Interview with Havas chief executive David Jones. Business, P4 Financial Times Parties race for press deadline. P4 More urgency needed, says Leveson. P4 Google shifts €9bn to Bermuda. P17 YouView partners eye cash injection. P2 The Times Leveson declines to offer way out of impasse over press regulation. P22 Brand Beckham makes more than £5m last year. P31 TV presenter fired for showing too much cleavage. P44 WPP says $2.5bn is too much to pay for IMG Worldwide. P48 The Independent Leveson refuses to be drawn into row on press regulation. P4 Long lost Doctor Who episodes found in Nigeria. P27 DreamWorks chief reveals he offered $75m for more Breaking Bad. P27 Haymarket buys stake in The Knowledge Engineers. P56 i Leveson refuses to take sides in press regulation debate. P2, 23 Lost Doctor Who episodes found in Nigeria. P3, 31 Haymarket takes minority stake in The Knowledge Engineers. P47 Wall Street Journal Europe BlackBerry co-founder explores bid. P16 Daily Mail Leveson's anger as MPs question him over lawyers' affair. P12 Daily Express Strictly Come Dancing coverage. P9 Beckham's firms report profits. P11 Long lost Doctor Who episodes found in Nigeria. P25 The Sun Leveson appears in front of a committee of MPs. P6 Daily Mirror Long lost Doctor Who episodes found in Nigeria. P1, 7 X Factor coverage. P3 Strictly Come Dancing coverage. P15 Jonathan Ross interview. P23 Daily Star X Factor coverage. P6 Strictly Come Dancing coverage. P7 Brand Beckham raked in £35m last year. P8 Lost Doctor Who episodes found in Nigeria. P41 Go to MediaGuardian