Ed Miliband, Labour party leader, at the 2013 party conference, Brighton Photograph: REX/Ray Tang • It's all on the up and up for Labour. The conference season went well; Ed Miliband confounded more of the doubters; and his grand scheme to forge a new relationship with the unions survived intact. Still, behind the scenes, party bigwigs are worried. Notes from a pre-conference meeting of the national executive committee reveal deep scepticism that union members, required to join the party directly rather than via their unions, will actually do so. "For some," writes NEC member Ann Black, "faith in the leader was sufficient. Others wanted to believe, but pleaded for signs that this would work. And some of us thought the financial risks too great. The NEC is responsible under clause I for organising and maintaining a political Labour party. We are still paying off Tony Blair's debts. The GMB are merely anticipating the impact of these new proposals in withholding £1m: they contacted 20,000 members and only 81 joined Labour." And the precedent is worrying. Look at the last grand wheeze, the registered supporters project. "In 2011," says Black, "Peter Hain and Ed Miliband anticipated well over 50,000 within a year. After two years we have, I am told, under 20,000 unverified e-mail addresses." A leap of faith, indeed – even for those who want to believe. • They believe in Brent, where, after Sarah Teather's decision to stand down, Labour would appear to be a shoo-in in this part of north London. The bad odour that surrounds the Lib Dems makes it unlikely that the Clegg-ites can hold Brent Central. So it's pretty much a walkover for whoever secures the Labour nomination, and while this makes it desirable to newcomers of all shapes and sizes, there is nothing to stop more seasoned hands bringing their experience to bear. Many are watching for signs of movement from former Labour ministers Dawn Butler and even Tony McNulty, who fell at the height of the expenses scandal and whose wife, Christine Gilbert, is chief exec of the local council. Last spied, he was seeking moral restitution by training at City University to be a political journalist. He'd be fit for priesthood now. • Many hope that Brent, with its high minority population, will yield another minority MP for Labour, and to that end the spotlight is on Butler, Brent Council leader Mohammed Butt, east London activist Amina Ali, and Hackney councillor Patrick Vernon. And yet, and yet. Talk of former London mayor – and one-time Brent East MP – Ken Livingstone rising like a phoenix just won't go away. • The Edward Snowden revelations provoke more media violence as rightwing types seize on that Henny Penny briefing by MI5 boss Andrew "nosey" Parker. Yesterday the Mail and its outriders revealed that the prime minister supported Parker's view that the Guardian's Snowden disclosures about snooping by the US National Security Agency and the UK's GCHQ gave succour to terrorists. Neither Parker nor the PM produce any evidence, nor do their cheerleaders require them to. Meanwhile, the pope remains a Catholic. All sorts of characters are being dragged into this passion play now, including Newsnight editor Ian Katz, who is implicated because he worked at the Guardian and thus, inevitably, forms part of the leftwing nexus that now controls all of the major British institutions. And there is Patrick Mercer MP, drafted in to bolster the MI5 attack by dint of his past as a Downing Street security adviser. We last saw him in the summer when the Mail reproduced a photo secured by BBC Panorama and declared: "Is this the moment MP signs fake lobbying contract? Tory Patrick Mercer quits party as Cameron critic falls for sting operation and pockets £4,000 to lobby for Fiji." Still, that was then. Now he is grist for the mill. • As is Sir Malcolm Rifkind, chair of parliament's intelligence and security committee. According to the Telegraph, he says that "the intelligence agencies should be trusted to operate in secret because they are not 'political tools" of repression". Which begs the question: why do we need him or his committee. Why not leave the spooks to do just as they please? Twitter: @hugh_muir