David Miranda was detained under schedule 7 powers for nine hours in August. Photograph: Ricardo Moraes/Reuters Stop and search powers at ports and airports – used to detain the partner of the Guardian journalist Glenn Greenwald for nine hours during the summer – are too intrusive, according to a parliamentary committee. A report by the joint committee on human rights (JCHR) welcomes government promises to curtail powers contained in schedule 7 of the Terrorism Act 2000 but says officers must have a "reasonable suspicion" of any passenger's involvement in terrorism before they can download and retain the contents of mobile phones or laptops. MPs and peers on the committee are calling for these further restrictions to be imposed on the stop and search system when the reforms come before the House of Commons as part of the government's antisocial behaviour, crime and policing bill on Monday. The government has already promised to narrow the scope of the schedule 7 powers. In its report, the JCHR says there should be a legal distinction between powers that can be used without reasonable suspicion – such as questioning, requesting documentation and physically searching persons and property – and more invasive powers. "In our view, the … more intrusive powers [such as detention, strip-searching, searching the contents of personal electronic devices, the taking of biometric samples, seizure and retention of property] should be exercisable only if the examining officer reasonably suspects that the person is or has been involved in terrorism." It adds: "We therefore recommend that the bill be amended to introduce a reasonable suspicion requirement before the more intrusive powers under schedule 7 are exercisable. We recommend that the reasonable suspicion threshold be introduced at the point at which the person being examined is formally detained, which the bill requires to happen after an hour of questioning." The JCHR report refers to the arrest at Heathrow airport in August of David Miranda, the partner of Greenwald, who wrote the first Guardian stories based on intelligence material leaked by Edward Snowden. Miranda, a Brazilian national, was in transit between Berlin and Rio de Janeiro. Miranda was detained and questioned for nine hours. His electronic devices were seized and detained by the police under schedule 7 powers. He has launched a judicial review of the decision to hold him and confiscate material. The action is against the home secretary, Theresa May, and the Metropolitan police. Hywel Francis MP, chair of the JCHR, said: "My committee welcomes the improvements that this bill makes to the very wide counter-terrorism power to stop, question and detain people at ports and airports. Given the current nature of the threat from international terrorism, we also accept that the government has made out the case for having an unusual power to stop, question and search travellers without suspicion. "However, recent events have brought to the world's attention how extraordinarily broad those powers are. They include the power to detain somebody, to take their mobile phone and laptop and download all the information on it, and to take biometric samples, all without reasonable suspicion. Most people would be shocked to know that the police have such extensive powers which could be exercised in relation to anyone, whether suspicious or not." Shami Chakrabarti, director of the human rights campaign group Liberty, said: "David Miranda's nine-hour detention lifted the lid on the scandal of schedule 7 and now one of parliament's most influential cross-party committees has echoed the growing call for reform. "But papering over the cracks of this dangerous, overbroad power won't achieve anything – schedule 7 is ripe for abuse, regularly wielded in discriminatory fashion and must be repealed without delay." The Independent Police Complaints Commission (IPCC) has filed papers at the high court after the Metropolitan police refused to reveal the results of investigations into its use of the powers. Legal action calling for a judicial review was taken in "direct response" to complaints by community groups that innocent Muslims had been targeted, the IPCC said.