Edward Snowden, whose revelations have caused a huge media debate about press freedom. Photograph: /AP The behaviour of much of the British press over the last week has been bewilderingly inconsistent. Papers that are against the power of the state as a defining editorial principle have swung behind the government and MI5 to attack the Guardian's publication of the Snowden leaks and have come close to calling for the paper's prosecution. The Daily Mail, which once fiercely opposed the erosion of liberties under the Labour government, now finds itself in the curious position of not only vilifying journalism but supporting the state's right to carry out blanket surveillance of everyone's communications. On the one hand, the Mail and others on the right of centre passionately resist the role of the state (most recently in regulating newspapers), but on the other are relaxed about a massive extension of the state's power over individuals' lives. In normal circumstances, this would incur the wrath of those papers. But these are not normal circumstances and so the state is privileged, in this instance, over the individual. Funny, that. At no stage have these news organisations acknowledged that Snowden's disclosures should prompt an urgent debate on the balance between liberty and security, as they have done in the US, where President Obama has conceded the need for an overhaul of the National Security Agency's surveillance programmes. And James Clapper, director of National Intelligence in the US, has said that "some of the debate needed to happen"'. But last week there was precious little interest in hosting a debate. There was no shade, nuance or complexity on view. Instead, some newspapers pursued what looked decidedly like a grudge against the Guardian, resentful at that paper's role in the phone-hacking scandal that led to the Leveson inquiry. It is unfortunate that British journalism is unable to distinguish between our own interests and a matter of principle that affects all our readers. Using the Snowden revelations as an excuse to grind old axes doesn't serve Britons or Britain very well.