Boris Johnson has urged newspapers to boycott the royal charter on press regulation. Photograph: Richard Soans/Demotix/Corbis Boris Johnson has urged newspapers to boycott the government's proposed royal charter on press regulation, branding the exercise a "monstrous folly". The mayor of London used his Daily Telegraph column on Monday to warn that the government was "on the verge of eroding the freedom of the press" and that any new regulation was pointless. In a move that sets him on a collision course with the culture secretary, Maria Miller, Johnson said: "Good for Fraser Nelson. It strikes me that he is 100% right. The editor of the Spectator has announced that his ancient and illustrious publication will have nothing whatever to do with any new system of press regulation. "He will neither bow nor truckle to any kind of control. He will not 'sign up'. He will politely tell the new bossyboots institution to mind its own beeswax, and he will continue to publish without fear or favour. "I think the whole of the media should do the same. Stuff all this malarkey about the privy council and a royal charter." Johnson, a former journalist, said it was "a string of essentially political embarrassments" that led to last year's Leveson inquiry into press standards. "Why are we embarking on this monstrous folly? Because of a string of essentially political embarrassments that led to the Leveson inquiry – and at the beginning of it all was the expenses scandal, and the sense among MPs that they had been brutally treated by the press," he wrote. His intervention comes just three days after Miller announced that the government had reached a deal with Labour and the Liberal Democrats over a new system of press regulation. The Newspaper Society, a steering group representing several major publishers, indicated on Friday that it would shun the cross-party royal charter. The group said it failed to meet their fundamental concerns and was neither voluntary nor independent. In his Telegraph column, Johnson warned that the new body backed by the privy council was pointless and "wrong in principle". He wrote: "We have no need of some new body backed by statute, or the privy council, and it is wrong in principle. You either have a free press or you don't. "You can't sell the pass, and admit the principle of regulation – because it is in the nature of regulation that it swells and grows. You can't be a little bit pregnant." Johnson also backed the Guardian's disclosure of National Security Agency surveillance secrets obtained from the whistleblower Edward Snowden. "We need someone to tell us that we are all being spied on by the American security services – that strikes me as being an invaluable bit of news, if hardly surprising," he said. "And if papers are genuinely at risk of compromising our national security by their revelations, then we have the D-notice system – to which all editors subscribe – to keep them in order. "The last and most powerful point against any new regulation of papers is that it is so completely pointless. We live in a world in which vast quantities of news can be instantly disseminated across the internet, and by companies way beyond any conceivable reach of parliament or government. "So I hope the press will tell the privy council to stick it in the privy; and if you are bothered by those nasty people from the media, and they won't go away, and they continue to sit outside your house asking questions to which you have already told them the answer, may I recommend that you do as my children and I once did years ago. We imitated Eddie Murphy in Beverly Hills Cop, and we stuffed bananas secretly up the reporter's tailpipe, and I remember us laughing helplessly at her air of puzzlement as she kaboing-ed up the road. Far better than regulation." The Daily Mail also came out strongly against the cross-party plan on Monday, warning that it would "end 300 years of freedom from state interference". In a leader column, the paper said its campaign against the controversial Liverpool Care Pathway, the widely criticised system to support patients as they near death, had been met with scorn from the Royal College of GPs, the Lancet and the British Medical Association. It added: "Isn't it all too easy to image how a state-overseen press regulator, imbued with the establishment mentality, might have reached the same conclusion – silencing us and leaving countless more to suffer under this 'national disgrace'? "Yet politicians of all three parties are now conspiring to impose just such a body on the press to end 300 years of freedom from state interference."