Top eight stories on MediaGuardian New York Times: UK demanded Snowden documents Jill Abramson says she was approached by UK embassy officials after announcing collaboration with Guardian over NSA files New York Times's Jill Abramson: 'The First Amendment is first for a reason' The New York Times executive editor on the new challenges facing investigative journalism and the paper's international expansion programme Boris Johnson: press charter is monstrous folly Mayor of London says new regulation is unnecessary and government is on verge of eroding press freedom Sky to air remake of The Bridge 'We took what was wonderful from the original and then made our own show. This is particular to the English and French experience,' says producer Jane Featherstone The X Factor sheds 1 million viewers X Factor's live debut sees significant ratings drop on last year despite innovations in this series such as the 'flash vote' London Live 'cannot be worthy but dull' As the local TV station prepares to launch in March, Vikki Cook says the capital should prepare for some surprising talent Why Facebook and Twitter are eyeing up TV The BBC has responded to changes in the way we view – and many industry leaders say simplicity is the key to the future Piers Morgan: 'I want to be in on the big stuff' He's mates with Gordon Brown and Cameron Diaz, he has 3.7m Twitter followers – and he's a passionate anti-gun campaigner. Simon Hattenstone meets self-confessed 'cocky git' and CNN anchor Piers Morgan Top comment on MediaGuardian Radios need to look like cool too David Hepworth: The industry is failing to attract the next generation of listeners, while spooking its most satisfied customers, the over-50s Today's headlines The Guardian Sky builds Tunnel on the Bridge's blueprint. P7 Strong public support for royal charter press plan. P7 British asked New York Times to hand over Edward Snowden documents. P9 Eating popcorn may screen out film adverts' effects. P15 Acclaimed director Pedri Amodovar denounces cuts to Spanish cinema. P15 Nick Davies: Who should judge if a leak is too sensitive to report? Not politicians or spooks, that's for sure. P24 Leader: press freedom and state surveillance. P26 MediaGuardian: David Hepworth on the future of radio. P28 MediaGuardian: MediaMonkey's Diary. P28 MediaGuardian: Interview with Jill Abramson, executive editor of the New York Times. P29 MediaGuardian: 'London Live cannot be WBD – worthy but dull'. P30 How Piers Morgan went to war with the US gun lobby. G2, P6, P7, P8, P9 Daily Telegraph How Nick Robinson got under the skin of Gordon Brown. P5 Return my laptop, tweets Miranda Hart. P5 David Attenborough is wrong to worry about global population increase, says Professor Robert Winston. P9 BBC needs to trust its writers again, says House of Cards creator Lord Dobbs. P9 Vanessa Feltz exits Strictly Come Dancing. P9 Grilling for Lord Patten over BBC 'bias' in Miliband father row. P14 Boris Johnson: It's a vigorous press that keeps our country honest. P22 Financial Times Google hopes new ad ploy has clicked. P26 The Times Jennifer Saunders attacks red carpet 'beauty pageant'. P3 It's not cricket: cuts pull the plug on Sky TV for judges. P7 New Doctor to be lord of his own wardrobe. P9 David Attenborough has got it wrong over population crisis, says Lord Winston. P9 Press law would risk Dreyfus affairs in Britain, says author Robert Harris. Paid-off staff back at the BBC. P13 Actor chosen to play kinky billionaire in Fifty Shades of Grey film drops out of the role. P35 The Independent BBC will not be 'mawkish' about first world war anniversary, says Adrian Van Klaveren. P1,8-9 Editor-in-chief Chris Blackhurst: I would not have published Edward Snowden leaks. P14-15 Conservation must trump cute animals, says BBC presenter Chris Packham. P28 The US trend of remaking UK dramas with their original star. P45 Ian Burrell: Fleet Street hostilities in full flow. P55 The slow decline of the music press. P55 i Conservation must trump cute animals, says BBC presenter Chris Packham. P11 The BBC's plans for first world war anniversary. P24 The US trend of remaking UK dramas with their original star. P35 Ian Burrell: Fleet Street hostilities in full flow. P40 The slow decline of the music press. P40 Danny Rogers: Energy companies need more than glossy ads. P40 Wall Street Journal Europe Twitter close to securing $1bn credit line from bankers in flotation. P1, P20 NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden says he has no regrets. P3 Google to place user names, photos in ads. P17 Microsoft's CEO search splits board. P17 Daily Mail Strictly Come Dancing fans' fury over Coronation Street star trained as dancer. P3 Great British Bake Off contender insists she's not sweet on Paul Hollywood. P3 Guardian 'sent Snowden secrets by parcel courier'. P8 Amanda Holden says she was sexually assaulted by a famous comedian. P9 Posing for a men's magazine, scourge of the lads' mags. P13 Leader: Press freedom and a life and death matter. P14 Richard Kay: BBC boss's £8,000 night at the Proms. P37 Daily Express Vanessa Feltz waltzes off Strictly Come Dancing. P3 The Sun Grand Theft Auto V is fastest-selling video game ever. P7 The X Factor coverage. P12-13 Strictly Come Dancing beats The X Factor in Saturday ratings. P13 Strictly Come Dancing coverage. P13 The Sin's Column Idol finalists. P20 The 10 worst smartphone apps. P28 The X Factor coverage. TV Biz P1 Danny Boyle to direct two new TV series. TV Biz P1 Cilla Black interview. TV Biz P2-3 Daily Mirror The X Factor final to go head to head with BBC Sports Personality of the Year. P3 Editorial: Mistake for The X Factor final and BBC Sports Personality of the Year to go head to head. P8 Kevin Maguire: Why Conservative attacks on BBC are wrong. P8 Strictly Come Dancing coverage. P11 ITV bosses plan to drop Aled Jones and Lorraine Kelly and bring in Kate Thornton in Daybreak shakeup. P15 Cilla Black interview. P20-21 Loose Women's Andrea McLean reveals breast cancer fright. P23 Book chains sold 'rape porn' online. P27 Piers Morgan's battle for US gun control. P32-33 Daily Star Great British Bake Off star Mark Berry worth £15m. P3 The X Factor loses out to Strictly Come Dancing on Saturday. P6 Strictly Come Dancing coverage. P7 'Pan's People were in fear of Jimmy Savile'. P14 Amanda Holden book coverage. P17 Go to MediaGuardian