'Andrew Parker, the new director general of MI5, should be slower to employ this foolish, self-serving rhetoric.' Photograph: REX/Gavin Rodgers Where should one draw the boundaries between secrecy, openness and security? Probably not by privatising the right to publish, when it comes to the work of the security agencies. It may do for libertarians like Rand Paul to argue the state cannot be trusted with anything, so that government should be vanishingly small, and that it certainly shouldn't be permitted deep conspiratorial secrets. But it's an odd position for left-of-centre believers in the state to wish away any credible apparatus of secret intelligence. To express the blindingly obvious, it is an entirely legitimate manifestation of state power in a democratic society to have agencies that, according to strict legal limitations, are permitted to surveil and to intrude in the cause of public safety. This is why WikiLeaks is a false prophet. And why Julian Assange's philosophy – such as it exists – is a childish stamp of the feet, and deeply totalitarian. After all, elements of secrecy and discretion are an intrinsic aspect of any human life that retains its dignity. It's discomforting to consider where fundamentalists for openness might be inclined to draw the line between the public and the private, and how much human identity they'd parade in the open. Is transparency always and in all circumstances good, even when it comes to governments? The technology of communications has changed more rapidly in the past 15 years than George Orwell imagined in his darkest writing. That television screen staring out from a bleak apartment wall at Winston Smith, once so threatening and strange, suddenly seems almost comically archaic and hardly scary at all. Contrary to the central conceit of 1984, most technological change has been a headlong, manic streak not into servitude, but into a surprising upland of human knowledge and engagement. Of course it has also meant that the spooks, who once sat in cubicles steaming open the glued-down flaps of a few dozen suspect envelopes, now have more fertile plains to furrow and the marvellous means to do it. Now they can steam open everything. The point is that this blinding transformation has careered into a world where legislation is so anti-modern that it struggles to distinguish between miniature bugs screwed into telephone earpieces and remote tapping from old-world, long gone GPO exchanges. And this as we learn that GCHQ, in all its technological majesty, can scoop up every last word that passes through those sleek cables beneath the Atlantic, everything we say and every last key that our fingers stroke. So it seems obvious that when it comes to surveillance and techniques of domestic spying, the law should be the master of technology. Anything else risks an increasing subservience of democracy to the unaccountability of security power. This means, at the very least, that as technologies develop, parliament should consider afresh the rules that govern their use by state agencies. What is the law that defines GCHQ's power over the internet; and how many warrants, and signed by whom, does it take to permit our spies access to everything? No one seems to know. Not the least of the inadequacies exposed by fallout from the Snowden revelations has been the sickly character of parliamentary oversight of the security agencies, even after recent reforms. An intelligence and security committee that goes into brief private session, only to emerge blinking into the daylight with protestations of apparent fealty to the security services, is a poor substitute for grown-up scrutiny. Co-option is not a uniquely British problem, but it surely is underlined when, amazingly, the ISC is chaired by Sir Malcolm Rifkind – once responsible for MI6 as foreign secretary. He seems badly compromised, and the ISC should never again be led by someone whom the public might perceive as having an axe to grind or an interest to defend. But worst of all has been the argument, heavily deployed in recent days, including by Sir Malcolm himself, that any more daylight than we currently enjoy simply assists the nation's enemies. Andrew Parker, the new director general of MI5, should be slower to employ this foolish, self-serving rhetoric that naively raises a perfectly legitimate question: how should we ensure that those privileged to be granted special powers to intrude into everything that is private serve a real public interest, rather than the dangerously false god of securitisation for its own sake? There is still great trust placed in the security agencies by the mass of British people. No doubt this results from a confidence that our spooks are in the business of targeting and going after our enemies, that we are on the same side and that they work for us. But nothing could be more damaging to this public support than a notion that, in pursuing a broadening vocation, the spies somehow find themselves squinting through lenses not just at the villains, but at the rest of us too.