Support for Labour rose to 38% following a conference dominated by Ed Miliband’s energy tax pledge, leaving the party four points ahead of the Tories. Photograph: REX/Ray Tang The two main parties earned a bounce from their conferences, according to a new Guardian/ICM poll which records both Labour and the Conservatives climbing two percentage points since last month. Support for Labour rose to 38% following a conference dominated by Ed Miliband's energy tax pledge, remaining four points ahead of the Tories. The twin gains came at the expense of the Liberal Democrats, who were down two percentage points to 12%, despite Nick Clegg's promise of free school meals for children aged between five and seven. Ukip eased off a single percentage point to 8%. The survey also revealed voters' deep mistrust of the media in the wake of MI5 and press criticism of the decision by the Guardian to report on Edward Snowden's leaks about NSA surveillance – and as large newspaper groups fight all-party plans to introduce a regulatory architecture via the privy council. Following the intervention by the new MI5 boss, Andrew Parker, in defence of large-scale internet monitoring by GCHQ, 58% believed that "the media should back off from exposing too much about state surveillance", compared with 34% who regard the media as "having a duty to inform the public about state snooping into their affairs". Within this, there was a marked party divide, with voters who voted Conservative in 2010 ranged firmly against investigative journalism in the security area (by 71% to 24%) while those who voted Labour last time were split down the middle, 47% to 46%. The result contrasts with a separate poll for the Sunday Times at the weekend, which found that by 46% to 38% the public thought the security services should not be allowed to store details of ordinary people's communications, a practice at the heart of what has been highlighted by the NSA files leaked by Snowden. In the United States, where the leading print editors have backed the Guardian's reporting of surveillance, Pew Center research – in the wake of this summer's NSA revelations – found public opinion on anti-terror policies had swung towards being more concerned about civil liberties than security for the first time since 9/11. Mistrust of the media emerges even more starkly in relation to reforming press regulation, as politicians and newspaper publishers weigh up how to respond to the Leveson inquiry. Most newspapers – though not the Guardian, Financial Times or Independent – have signalled they may ignore the politicians' proposal for a royal charter to establish an independent body to certifty the work of a revamped Press Complaints Commision, and set up their own regulator without external approval. This idea receives an overwhelming thumbs-down from voters: only 27% believe "the press should get on" with regulating itself, without waiting for the state to recognise it, whereas 64% believe that the press "needs to be subjected to independent, external regulation", underpinned by a state-recognised outside body to certify its work. There are large majorities against the idea of go-it-alone self-regulation among all age groups and social grades, as well as across the political spectrum. The preference for state-recognised certification of an independent regulator's work runs at 61% to 30% among Conservatives, which is little difference from the 64%–29% balance found among Labour supporters. Among the minor parties in Monday's poll, the SNP stands on 3%, Plaid Cymru on 1% and the Greens on 3%. This year's conferences sharpened the party divide, with George Osborne committing the Conservatives to newly stringent targets for the public finances, while Ed Miliband pledged Labour to reversing the coalition benefit cut known as the "bedroom tax". More polarised politics may be deepening voters' commitment – 66% of Tory supporters now say they are certain to turn out (up nine points on the month), and 60% of Labour supporters (up three). The single most debated proposal of conference season was Miliband's plan to cap household gas and electricity bills, something both the government and the energy companies suggested could trigger power shortages and blackouts. Interviewed in the days after energy giant SSE announced fresh price rises of 8.2%, voters are strongly on Miliband's side, even after being reminded of the claimed dangers. Only 30% agreed it was right to let "the market decide energy prices as now", half as many as the 61% who favoured "capping the energy prices because that helps struggling households". There were other signs, too, of Labour taking the edge in the economic populism stakes. The coalition's sale of Royal Mail last week was geared towards smaller investors, who are in line for a windfall after shares leapt 38% in conditional trading on Friday, and yet the new poll finds that most voters give privatisation the thumbs-down. Even after being reminded of the "many shares granted to smaller investors" who bought just £750 of stock, 63% deem privatisation a bad thing that will mean "higher prices and service cuts", as against 29% who regard it as a "good thing because it will reward investors" and allow modernisation. With both the energy issue and Royal Mail, there are striking partisan divisions – with Conservative supporters 62%-35% against the energy price cap, and 57%-38% in favour of the privatisation, while Labour supporters are respectively 78%-19% behind the cap on households bills, and 77%-20% against postal privatisation. Despite their party's role in coalition, Liberal Democrat voters side with Labour on both counts. They back Miliband's energy price cap by 60%-29%, and reject the sale of Royal Mail – in which Lib Dem cabinet ministers Vince Cable and Ed Davey have played important roles – by an emphatic 62% to 32% margin. • ICM Research interviewed a random sample of 1,004 adults aged 18+ by telephone on 11-13th October 2013. Interviews were conducted across the country and the results have been weighted to the profile of all adults.