Even without the prompting of Lord Justice Leveson, we journalists never stop talking about our work nowadays. Why do we do what we do? Are we doing it correctly? What future do we face? Four of the leading organisers and hosts for such talks, debates and discussions are the revitalised London Press Club, the energetic Media Society, the ever-reliable Frontline Club and City University London (where I teach). These events are popular too. They attract a mix of veterans, working journalists and would-be journalists. And they are treated seriously within the industry. For example, a Media Society panel discussion last week about local journalism was attended by three chief executives of regional publishing groups. So I'm delighted to publicise the latest crop of upcoming events. Get your diaries out now... Press Club: Dinsmore breakfast and women in media forum David Dinsmore has been the most outgoing Sun editor since it was launched in its present form in 1969. Now he will be interviewed, by Steve Hewlett, at a special breakfast at the ICA on 5 November. Sun editor David Dinsmore There is much for him to talk about, from Ed Miliband's call to remove Page 3, the introduction of the paper's online paywall and the relaunch of the Sun on Sunday. Oh yes, and that business about press regulation. As the Press Club blurb says: "It's unmissable for anyone interested in journalism's past, present or future." Breakfast begins at 8.30am, and to reserve a place you must email info@londonpressclub.co.uk. Priority will be given to Press Club members, who can attend for free. Remaining spaces will be allocated to non-members for a £10 fee. On 19 November, the Press Club - in company with the Huffington Post and the London Evening Standard - will host a women in media forum at the Stationers and Newspapermakers' Hall. Anne McElvoy will chair a panel that will include Standard editor Sarah Sands, HuffPo UK editor-in-chief Carla Buzasi, Sky News presenter Kay Burley and the Independent on Sunday's editor, Lisa Markwell. The discussion kicks off at 6.45pm (doors open at 6.15) and it is necessary to reserve a place by emailing info@londonpressclub.co.uk, with priority given to Press Club members, Media Society: David Leigh in conversation about investigative journalism A Media Society event is being devoted to David Leigh, who I described as the doyen of investigative journalists when he stepped down from his Guardian staff role earlier this year. Leigh will be interviewed about his 43-year journalistic career, the ethics of journalism and the future of investigative journalism by Phil Harding, the former senior BBC executive. David Leigh Leigh certainly has a lot to talk about, having been involved in some of the biggest newspaper scoops. They include the revelation of improper contacts between Saudi Arabian arms dealers and the former Conservative minister, Jonathan Aitken, which led to Aitken being jailed for perjury. Then there was the exposure of secret bribery payments by the arms company BAE and the dumping of toxic waste in the Ivory Coast by the oil firm Trafigura. The award-winning Leigh, as The Guardian's investigations editor, was also responsible for handling the Wikileaks exposures. David Leigh in conversation will take place at the Adam Street Private Members Club, off The Strand in London, on 14 November from 6.30pm. To book go to eventbrite.co.uk. Media Society members, £10; non-members, £15; and students need only pay £5. City University: Andrew Norfolk, in defence of journalism Andrew Norfolk, chief investigative reporter at The Times, won the 2012 Orwell prize and the Paul Foot award for his work in exposing the targeting, grooming and sexual exploitation of teenage girls. Andrew Norfolk He spent two years investigating gangs who preyed on vulnerable girls, and the failures of state agencies to protect them and to prosecute the offenders. His articles prompted two government-ordered inquiries, a parliamentary inquiry and a new national action plan on child sexual exploitation. Norfolk will deliver a lecture entitled "In defence of journalism" on 6 November at City's Oliver Thompson theatre, beginning at 6.30pm (doors open 6pm). He will be introduced by Professor Heather Brooke. A drinks reception will follow at about 7.30pm. To book a place, go here. Frontline Club: Harry Evans, Glenn Greenwald and Jon Snow Glenn Greenwald The club's annual awards evening, on 24 October (next Thursday), will feature a keynote speech by former Sunday Times editor Harry Evans and a video message from Guardian reporter Glenn Greenwald. It will be hosted by Channel 4 News's Jon Snow. Evans needs no introduction. Greenwald, lest it has slipped your mind, was responsible for revealing the extensive surveillance conducted by the America's National Security Agency after working with whistleblower Edward Snowden. STOP PRESS: The tickets, which I said in my original posting cost £60 each, have just been declared free of charge! To book, go here.