The secretive US court overseeing mass surveillance has told the Senate that it substantially modifies nearly a quarter of all government surveillance requests, even though it approves almost all of them. Since its creation in 1978, the foreign intelligence surveillance (Fisa) court has only rejected a handful of the thousands of requests for surveillance made by the FBI or the National Security Agency, prompting a perception of the court as a step in the wiretapping process, rather than the major judicial check on unreasonable searches and seizures. But Reggie Walton, the presiding judge of the court, wrote to the leadership of the Senate judiciary committee to rebut accusations that the Fisa court is merely a judicial rubber stamp. His letter, dated October 11 and released on Tuesday, is the latest move by a court that is closed to the public to shed light on a surveillance process that has sparked an international outcry. “During the three-month period between July 1 through September 30, we have observed that 24.4% of matters submitted ultimately involved substantive changes to the information provided by the government or to the authorities granted as a result of court inquiry or action,” Walton wrote to senators Patrick Leahy and Chuck Grassley. “This does not include, for example, mere typographical corrections.” Walton, in an earlier letter to the senators in July, did not challenge the contention that the Fisa court approves 99% of government surveillance requests. But he disputed the context, writing that “many [government] applications are altered prior to final submission or even held from final submission entirely, often after an indication that a judge would not approve them.” But Walton conceded in his October 11 letter that because the pre-approval modifications were the result of an “informal” back-and-forth between the Justice Department and the court, it might be disputed just how substantial those modifications have been. “[T]hese statistics are an attempt to measure the details of what are, typically, informal communications between the branches,” Walton wrote. “Therefore, the determination of when exactly a modification is ‘substantial,’ and whether it was caused solely by the [court’s] intervention, can be a judgment call." The Fisa court has only released a handful of its secret opinions in its three decades of existence, and none of the “informal communications” that contribute to the modifications cited by Walton, although some tension between court and government can be gleaned through the opinions. But since the revelations of the court-approved bulk collection of Americans’ phone records – first reported by the Guardian in June thanks to whistleblower Edward Snowden – the Fisa court has released more of its secret work over the past four months than ever before, in an apparent attempt at image rehabilitation, and to try to bolster public confidence over unpopular surveillance activities. It has also ordered more disclosure from the government about its own surveillance rulings, and publicly stated that Snowden’s leaks have “engendered considerable public interest and debate,” particularly over the bulk phone records collection. Yet it has not substantively restricted any of the bulk surveillance efforts it oversees. On Friday, it reapproved another 90-day request for millions of Americans’ phone data. Walton, the chief judge on the court, is emblematic of both perspectives. In a recently declassified case, Walton banned NSA analysts from accessing the phone records databases after the NSA revealed to it that it had repeatedly violated the court-mandated procedures for access. Walton spent much of 2009 blocking such access until he became satisfied the program could be carried out within court-imposed restrictions, and lamented that the court’s lack of technical expertise left it unable to independently oversee the effort. Yet Walton, like his Fisa court colleagues, has ultimately reapproved the surveillance programs, accepting the government’s promises to abide by the court’s restrictions and the government’s warnings that the country will be more vulnerable to terrorism without bulk surveillance. There is some legislative frustration with the court’s approval of programs that some contend are dubiously legal and even constitutional. They have resulted in a pending measure, introduced by Jim Sensenbrenner in the House and Leahy in the Senate, to reform the court by adding a petitioner before it who advocates for the public’s privacy interests. It would be the most substantial reform of the Fisa court in its history. The court has only ever heard from the government. Regardless of the fate of those legislative efforts, the court also faces a different kind of pressure: to disclose a seminal ruling that establishes why the court believes the bulk collection of Americans’ phone records is “relevant” to any terrorism investigation. The discrepancy between the program and the so-called “relevance” standard under the Patriot Act, the law used to justify the program, led Sensenbrenner, the original author of the act, to propose banning bulk collection. People familiar with the thinking of Colleen Kollar-Kotelly, a former Fisa court presiding judge and the author of the still-secret ruling, told the Washington Post recently that Kollar-Kotelly wants the important ruling released.