Top eight stories on MediaGuardian BBC to create iPlayer controller role Director of television says he wants enhanced on-demand service to have its own budget of a 'few million pounds' BBC Salford payouts were too high, say MPs Commons public accounts committee finds staff were paid up to £150,000 to move from London to Manchester Glenn Greenwald to leave the Guardian Journalist who broke stories about widespread NSA surveillance leaving to pursue 'once-in-a-career journalistic opportunity' New York Times editor defends journalists over Edward Snowden Jill Abramson says on BBC's Newsnight that Guardian articles on NSA files are 'very much in the public interest' Nielsen launches cross-platform ad measure System will measure audience for TV and online ads The Great British Bake Off moves to BBC1 Show rewarded for rising viewing figures by following shows such as MasterChef and The Apprentice onto flagship channel Libel tourism at an end, say lawyers Judgments throwing out cases by Pavel Karpov and Stanko Subotic will make it harder for foreign claimants to sue BBC's Alan Yentob: Mark Byford might have helped avoid Jimmy Savile crisis Creative director says ex-deputy director general could have guided corporation through 'virtual meltdown' in news division Top comment on MediaGuardian Newsweek: the poster child of magazine journalism failure Michael Wolff: Newsweek's new editor, Jim Impoco, wants to make the brand an 'indispensable' read again. I wish him the best of luck Today's headlines The Guardian Burberry's Angela Ahrendts to join Apple. P3 BBC Salford payouts were unacceptably high, say MPs. P6 Jimmy Savile boasted to police of 'policy' to halt abuse claims. P9 BBC to revive Clangers. G2 P2 Daily Telegraph I love to go to court, Jimmy Savile warned police. P2 The Great British Bake Off switching to BBC1. P5 Julian Smith MP urges Met police to investigate the Guardian over GCHQ disclosures. P5 Yes, BBC salaries are too high - including mine, admits Alan Yentob. P7 BBC viewers give Madeleine McCann detectives a suspect's name. P11 Sir Anthony Hopkins lavishes praise on Bryan Cranston, the Breaking Bad star. P22 Argentina's president accused of media assault to silence critics. P24 Financial Times Burberry's Angela Ahrendts to join Apple. P1,17,20 Dublin to shut door on Apple tax loophole. P1 Amazon in venture with HTC. P19 Mecom lifts outlook as chief prepares to quit. P22 The Times Girls used to assault me, Jimmy Savile boasted to police. P8 Same man named by callers after TV Madeleine McCann appeal. P9 BBC staff were paid up to £150,000 to move to Salford. P13 Festival unveils off-the-wall rival to 3D movies. P17 The Independent BBC censured by watchdog over links with property giant. P8 Jimmy Savile told police he was assaulted by fans. P23 Breaking Bad acting best I've ever seen, says Sir Anthony Hopkins. P33 i BBC link to firm under scrutiny for tax affairs criticised by watchdog. P7 Jimmy Savile told police that girls assaulted him. P20 Daily Mail Jimmy Savile and the tapes that damn the police. P1, 6-7 Fans reeling as car crash horror hits Doc Martin. P3 Police deluged by 1,000 tips from Maddie Crimewatch. P11 I deserve my £330,000 salary, says Alan Yentob. P13 BBC's £24m relocation cost 'difficult to justify'. P25 Elton? Dull and pretentious. Bowie? Out of Tune … BBC's 1960s verdict on future stars. P35 Daily Express Great British Bake Off moves to BBC1. P3 Hunt for Madeleine McCann steps up after TV appeal. P5 Crimewatch programme on Madeleine McCann attracts 7.3 million viewers. P5 The Sun Prime Madeleine McCann suspect is named by callers as TV appeal leads to 1,000 tip-offs. P8-9 Soft Jimmy Savile police interview revealed. P22-23 Bruce Forsyth is not doddery, insists Tess Daly. TV Biz P2-3 Daily Mirror Tasty move as Great British Bake Off goes to BBC. P3 Hunt for Madeleine McCann steps up after TV appeal. P5 Jimmy Savile told police he brushed girls away like midges. P19 Daily Star Coronation Street's Michael Le Vell returns to the Rovers Return. P1, 9 Great British Bake Off swaps BBC2 for BBC1. P3 BBC criticised over Salford relocation. P2 TV appeal leads to 1,000 tip-offs in Madeleine McCann hunt. P7 Jimmy Savile told police he brushed girls away like midges. P15 Go to MediaGuardian