2.15pm BST • Labour has accused David Cameron of misleading MPs about what is happening to living standards. During PMQs Ed Miliband said that living standards have fallen in 39 of the 40 months that Cameron has been prime minister. But, in response to a later question from the Labour MP Gareth Thomas, Cameron said that Labour were wrong to focus just on wages. What you have to do is look at disposable income as well as wages. Because this government has cut people's taxes, because we are allowing people to keep £10,000 of what they earn before they pay taxes, disposable income went up last year and it is rising as we speak today.  Labour later said this was "total nonsense", citing a report from the Office for National Statistics saying that in the second quarter of 2013 (the most recent for which figures are available) real household disposable income was 0.7% lower than it was a year earlier. But the Tories said that over the last four quarters it was higher than under Labour.  • Cameron has welcomed today's figures showing that unemployment is falling. This is what he said at PMQs. The number in work is up 155,000. Unemployment is down 18,000. Women's unemployment is down, youth unemployment is down, long-term unemployment is down and vacancies are up. Crucially, the fall in the claimant count is 41,000 this month alone. That is the fastest fall in the number of people claiming unemployment benefit since February 1997. These are welcome figures. Of course, we all want to see living standards improve, and last year disposable income increased. But the way to deliver on living standards is to grow the economy, keep producing the jobs and cut people's taxes. Miliband said that the fall in unemployment was welcome, but that "prices have risen faster than wages." • Cameron has encouraged a Commons select committee to investigate whether the Guardian has broken the law or damaged national security by publishing secrets leaked by the National Security Agency whistleblower Edward Snowden. As Patrick Wintour reports, Cameron made his proposal in response to a question from former defence secretary Liam Fox, saying the Guardian had been guilty of double standards for exposing the scandal of phone hacking by newspapers and yet had gone onto publish secrets from the NSA taken by Snowden. This is what Cameron said at PMQs. The plain fact is that what has happened has damaged national security and in many ways the Guardian themselves admitted that when they agreed, when asked politely by my national security adviser and cabinet secretary to destroy the files they had, they went ahead and destroyed those files. So they know that what they're dealing with is dangerous for national security. I think it's up to select committees in this house if they want to examine this issue and make further recommendations. • Cameron has said that Andrew Mitchell, the former chief whip, is owed an apology by the police over "plebgate". As Patrick Wintour reports, Cameron said at PMQS that the conduct of three officers from the Police Federation was "not acceptable", remarks that put him at odds with three chief constables who have refused to take any disciplinary action against officers alleged to have misled the public over a meeting with Mitchell at the height of the Plebgate row. I agree 100% with what the home secretary said yesterday and I think we should be clear about what we are discussing here. The whole case about what happened outside 10 Downing Street, that's with the CPS and we have to leave that on one side until they make their decision. What's being discussed here is the fact that … the former chief whip had a meeting with Police Federation officers in his committee where he gave a full account of what had happened, they left that meeting and claimed he had given them no account at all. Fortunately this meeting was recorded so he has been able to prove that what he said was true and what the police officers said was untrue." [Mithcell] is owed an apology. The conduct of these officers was not acceptable. These things should be properly investigated, as the home secretary has said. Earlier Sir Hugh Order, the president of the Association of Chief Police Officers, said that the behaviour of some officers in the Plebgate scandal fell below acceptable standards but there are questions over how serious their wrongdoing was. • Greg Clark, the cities minister, has said that said Andrew Mitchell should be given his job back if is exonerated. This is what Clark told the World at One.  What happened in the West Midlands seems to me on the face of it that Andrew Mitchell was dealt a substantial injustice and for that I think he deserves an apology and the prime minister was quite right to point that out. I think he should have his job back if he’s exonerated and I think he will be. • Bob Jones, the police commissioner for the West Midlands, has defended the decision not to discipline the three Police Federation officers accused of giving an misleading account of their meeting with Andrew Mitchell. This is what he told the BBC's Daily Politics. There was a very thorough investigation, supervised by the IPCC, the results of which were then put to three senior officers in three different forces, who all came to the conclusion on the facts and the legal advice that there was no case for levying any disciplinary action. That is a fair and open process which at any time the IPCC could have taken over and run themselves, they decided not to, they washed their hands of it and then made a rather inflammatory statement at the end. • Cameron has welcomed the supreme court's decision to reject appeals from two prisoners demanding the right to vote. This is what he told PMQs. Can I congratulate the attorney general on this excellent result? The attorney general fought this case himself in front of the supreme court. He made a compelling and forceful argument and it is a victory for common sense.  My views on this are well known. I do not believe that prisoners should have the vote and I believe that it is a matter for this House of Commons (to decide whether they should have the vote). The supreme court today has stood up for common sense, it has stood up for democracy and it has made clear that it has nothing to do with the European Union and I think we can all rejoice at that result. • Nick Hardwick, the chief inspector of prisons, has told a parliamentary committee that the government will set a bad example to prisoners if it ignore the European court of human rights ruling saying some prisoners should get the vote. To say 'Here is a judgment of a court we don't like, so we are not going to do it' would set a very bad example and would have a negative effect on some people. I think the judgment's been made and what would set a bad example would be if we said to prisoners 'We don't like that judgment, therefore we aren't going to do it'. I can't square that with my role. • Cameron has said that Atos, the company that assesses whether people claiming disability benefits are fit to work, needs to improve its decision making. "Everyone who has constituency surgeries knows we have to improve the quality of decision making about this issue," Cameron said in response to a question from Labour's Dennis Skinner. • Boris Johnson, the mayor of London, has said that mandarin should be taught as a mainstream foreign language in schools. Updated at 2.21pm BST