Top eight stories on MediaGuardian eBay founder backs Glenn Greenwald venture Pierre Omidyar says decision to set up news organisation fuelled by 'concern about press freedoms in the US and around the world' BSkyB profits hit by BT tussle Costs of £2.3bn rights deal hit bottom line in fiscal first quarter, but TV and broadband subscriptions show healthy growth MPs to investigate Guardian's Edward Snowden reports Keith Vaz says home affairs committee to look at newspaper's activities as part of inquiry into counter-terrorism. Wall-to-Wall's Alex Graham to step down Production company behind shows such as The Voice has named its creative director, Leanne Klein, as chief executive Sky News Arabia crew missing in Syria Abu Dhabi-based channel asks for information on whereabouts of reporter, cameraman and driver working near Aleppo 'BBC should be more accountable in Wales' National assembly's Andrew RT Davies says devolution should bring with it robust scrutiny of powerful broadcaster BBC2 controller: losing Bake Off just part of my job Janice Hadlow says sometimes you see successful shows you love 'get on the escalator and move up to the next level' Twofour merges with Boom Pictures Lorraine Heggessey's company merges with the firm behind Educating Yorkshire and Tom Daley diving show Splash! Top comment on MediaGuardian Ad break: Sears squirrels, Derrick Rose for Adidas Watch a quirky campaign in which squirrels revolt against people in our review of new commercials from around the world Today's headlines The Guardian Police watchdog launch inquiry into whether inspector 'acted on behalf of Savile'. P9 Kate Moss to join British Vogue as contributing fashion editor. P14 Early doubts about Doctor Who revealed. P15 Amazon and HTC plan new smartphone. P31 Jimmy Savile interview transcript exposes how abuser can run rings around interrogators. P34 Daily Telegraph Vinyl sales at their highest for 12 years. P3 TV deal for Booker prize winner Eleanor Catton. P11 Tory minister says press regulation is the most troubling thing the Coalition has done. P16 David Cameron says The Guardian knew it was compromising national security when it published leaks. P16 BBC spends millions on four-year project to honour sacrifice of first world war. P17 UK puts funds behind future tech stars. B3 LoveFilm and Spotify backers unite. B5 Financial Times John Gapper: the control freak formula at Apple and Burberry. P15 Tony Hall: The BBC is a cornerstone of Britain's creative industries. P15 EE argues spectrum fee means 4G is at risk. P20 Ubisoft hit as new games are delayed. P20 Telefonica takes Napster stake. P22 Richard Waters: Microsoft and Apple face different tests to adapt. P22 YouView appoints Simon Duffy as chairman. P25 ITV investors hope for World Cup ad bonanza. P35 The Times Paul Hollywood interview. P3 and Times2 BBC's plans for first world war centenary. P18 MP complains to police over Guardian. P23 Glenn Greenwald leaves Guardian for new venture. P23 The Independent BBC unveils Rupert Murdoch as star of its first world war anniversary coverage. P3 Sir Paul McCartney plays at the BBC 50 years after the Beatles. P6 Police watchdog launch inquiry into officer who 'acted on Savile's behalf'. P9 Leveson inquiry witnesses were silent for fear of 'monstering' by certain newspapers. P12 UK is Twitter's No 2 market. P23 i UK second only to US for Twitter revenue. P3 Kate Moss joins British Vogue as contributing fashion editor. P15 Simon Kelner: BBC has its faults, but thank you for Grayson Perry's Reith lecture. P16 Rupert Murdoch's father is hero of BBC war film. P20 Advertising spend growing at fastest rate for 13 years. P47 Digital publisher Future on course to deliver a dividend for the first time since 2011. P48 Wall Street Journal Europe Apple reduces its orders for iPhone 5C. P15,19 Sony's cameras that snap on to smartphones. P25 News site held liable for readers' comments in landmark European case. P25 Daily Mail Jimmy Savile's police crony 'fixed soft interview'. P7 Tory minister attacks plan for statutory control of the Press. P8 David Cameron backs calls for The Guardian to be investigated by MPs. P8 Angry viewers say crying got Ruby into Great British Bake Off final. P9 BBC to make 'digital cenotaph' to commemorate first world war centenary. P19 Spying fears over UK deal with Chinese internet giant. P24 UK is the most lucrative market for Twitter outside the US. P73 Daily Express Ex-police chief facing probe for 'acting on behalf of' Jimmy Saville. P4 Strictly Come Dancing favourite fights injury. P9 Virginia Blackburn : Apprentice winner Stella English has wasted a big chance. P16 BBC marks first world war with four-year tribute. P29 ITV scores a World Cup boost. P51 The Sun Call for Guardian to be investigated over Edward Snowden leaks. P2 Coronation Street coverage> p3 Editorial: Sun calls on Queen to throw out press royal charter. P8 Strictly Come Dancing coverage. P27 BBC unveils epic war centenary. TV Biz P2 Daily Mirror Strictly Come Dancing coverage. P3 The Queen opposes government decision to use royal charter for press regulation. P4 Daily Star Strictly Come Dancing favourite may have to quit due to injury. P10 Jimmy Saville warned of policeman by saying the girl would be legal at midnight. P15 Paul Gascoigne takes to Twitter to announce he's not dead. P23 BBC chiefs thought Doctor Who had no chance when it started. P25 The return of TV show The Walking Dead. P30 Go to MediaGuardian