2.11pm BST • The social mobility and child poverty commission has said that the government's attempts to achieve greater social mobility in Britain are being trumped by the economic and fiscal headwinds driving inequality. As Patrick Wintour reports, the commission, chaired by the former Labour minister Alan Milburn, finds that the coalition will miss its child poverty target by a long way and that pensioners are not bearing their share of the burden of fiscal consolidation. The government is making efforts to correct this,but not enough "to move the dial", the commission concludes, calling for pensioners' perks such as the winter fuel allowance and free TV licences to be withdrawn. • Tristram Hunt, the shadow education secretary, has said that Michael Gove has suffered a "devastating blow" to his flagship free schools policy after a new school in Derby was condemned as dysfunctional in a hard-hitting Ofsted report. As Nicholas Watt reports, speaking in an emergency Commons debate after the Guardian published a leaked copy of the report, Hunt said Ofsted's findings into the al-Madinah school in Derby showed that Gove's free schools programme was a "dangerous ideological" experiment. Ed Miliband made a similar point on a visit to Peckham. What this situation highlights is that Michael Gove's free school experiment is frankly wreaking havoc in some communities.  But, responding to Hunt in the Commons, David Laws, the education minister, accused Hunt of inconsistency, saying that only on Sunday he was proclaiming his support for free schools. Laws also said that in general free schools received better reports from Ofsted than other state schools. • David Cameron has urged British Gas customers to switch suppliers if they are unhappy about the company's decision to raise energy prices by 9.2%. The announcement was "very disappointing", Cameron told BBC Sussex radio. I think it is a very disappointing announcement by British Gas.  I think there are things we can do. We are intervening because we are legislating to say these companies have to put their customers on to the lowest tariff. I think a lot of customers find it utterly baffling how many tariffs they have. But there is something everyone can do, which is look to switch their electricity or gas bill from one supplier to another. On average, this can help people save sometimes as much as £200 on their bill. So I would encourage customers who are not happy with the service they're getting, are not happy with the prices, to go to the switching sites online and see whether they can get a better deal. • George Osborne, the chancellor, has said that Chinese firms will be allowed to buy a stake in Britain's nuclear power industry. • Nick Clegg has said that Andrew Mitchell is right to feel "pretty sore" about his treatment at the hands of three police officers who called for him to resign as chief whip last year after allegedly providing a false account of a meeting. • Clegg has has welcomed the decision of parliament's intelligence and security committee (ISC) to launch an inquiry into the extent and scale of mass surveillance undertaken by Britain's spy agencies. • A Conservative MP has said that the Guardian should be prosecuted if it does not hand over a decryption code that would enable the security services to read the intelligence files seized from David Miranda. Julian Smith made the point during business questions in the Commons. The editor of the Guardian recently boasted online that he was taking precautions to prevent UK security services having access to the files of vital national security that he had sent out of the remit of the UK court to the New York Times. Security services are still trying to decrypt these files, which the Independent newspaper described as 'highly detailed and a threat to national security'. Can we have a statement to reassure the House that the Guardian will be asked for a decryption key, and if not forthcoming, action will be taken? Tom Brake, the Lib Dem deputy leader of the Commons, said Smith would be able to pursue this matter further in a debate next Tuesday. But Labour's David Winnick defended the Guardian, saying it was "receiving threats and smears ... for publishing details which is not in any way a threat to the security of our country, information which the public have a right to know".  • Labour has announced that it would impose a levy on the profits of payday lenders that would be used to double the amount of public funding for low-cost alternatives, such as credit unions. In some quarters it has been dubbed a "Wonga tax". Curiously, this coincides with ... • The Department for Work and Pensions has announced a £38m project to expand credit unions. • Justine Greening, the international development secretary, has said the case for a public inquiry into the war in Afghanistan will be considered "at the highest level in government". In the Commons the Conservative MP Bernard Jenkin proposed an inquiry, saying more than twice as many British troops have died in Afghanistan as in Iraq. Greening replied:  I think you make an interesting point. Obviously we have yet to go through the draw-down process between now and the end of next year. The points you have made around the lessons that we can learn from this conflict and the UK military role within it are points well made and will certainly be considered at the highest level in Government. • Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland's deputy first minister, has claimed that public opinion will swing behind the Scottish independence referendum "Yes" campaign in the coming months. She made the point in an interview to mark the opening of the SNP's annual conference. We’re feeling optimistic, we’re in good heart, the referendum is absolutely there to be won. When you break down the independence debate into the different powers that would transfer to Scotland then you see majorities in favour of bringing economic powers to Scotland, welfare powers to Scotland, defence powers to Scotland. So, I think there’s a natural majority there for independence ... I would predict that over the next few months you will see that translate into growing support for "Yes". • A poll by Ipsos MORI has shown Labour's lead over the Tories dwindling to nothing. However, as the Press Association reports, Ed Miliband's personal ratings have improved since September, when the parties stood at 37% to 34%. The proportion satisfied with his performance rose from 24% to 36%. Labour's proposal for a 20-month energy bill freeze was the most popular policy unveiled during the conference season, with 62% saying it was best for them, compared with 56% backing George Osborne's petrol duty freeze. Liberal Democrat support was down one point over the month to 9%, behind Ukip on 10%. Gideon Skinner, head of political research at Ipsos MORI, said: The dividing lines between the leaders are a bit clearer after conference season, and they have all shored up their support - especially Ed Miliband, who has given more confidence to his own supporters. At the same time we have seen the Conservatives' vote share rise in recent months in line with economic optimism. The public's view is fascinatingly poised. • Gloria De Piero, the new shadow equalities minister, has appealed to the press to "call off the hunt" for topless pictures that she posed for as a teenager after learning a news agency was offering thousands of pounds for them. • The crime survey for England and Wales has reported a 7% fall in crime. • William Hague has said that the government wants the internet to remain "open and borderless". He made the comment in a speech to a conference in South Korea. On one side are countries like the UK and many others like Korea who argue that the internet must remain open and borderless, and benefit from collective oversight between governments, international organisations, industry and civil society. In our view this is the only way to ensure that the benefits of the digital age are expanded to all countries; that ingenuity and competition flourish and investment and enterprise are rewarded; and that the creativity that spurs economic growth is nurtured not stifled by excessive regulation. On the other side are countries calling for an international legal framework for the internet that would enable governments to exercise exclusive control over the Internet’s content and resources. I am convinced that placing the controls of cyberspace entirely in the hands of governments would be a drastic error that would have profound social and economic consequences. The dead hand of state control would be as stifling for the internet as it has been for many economies in the past. It would erect barriers that impede the free flow of ideas, and would lead to a ghettoised or two-tier cyberspace that hinders free trade and holds back economic growth and development. This world of closed, fragmented Internets would certainly be less free and democratic – but it would also be less creative, less innovative, less progressive and, ultimately, less prosperous than a world with a single and open Internet. • Owen Paterson, the environment secretary, has said that the badger cull in Gloucestershire failed to meet its target. • The Department for Education has said that only 27% of schools in regions targeted by the NUT and NASUWT teachers' strike have had to close. David Cameron said it was "very disappointing" that teachers went on strike.  I think it is very disappointing they have decided to go on strike. It is very inconvenient for parents, it is not good for pupils' education. And when we look at the things they are striking over, pensions and pay, they are things that have been decided independently by well-led reviews ... I was at my children's school today in London. One class was not there but the rest of the school was operating. So every praise to those teachers who have gone ahead and kept our schools open for our kids. • David Laws, the education minister, has announced that more scholarships and bursaries will be available to encourage talented graduates into teaching key subjects. • The Department for Education has published figures showing an increase in the number of pupils taking EBacc subjects at GCSE. That's all from me for today. I'm finishing early because I'm going up to Scotland for the SNP conference. I'll be blogging from there tomorrow and on Saturday. Thanks for the comments. Updated at 3.22pm BST