9.46am BST Good morning and welcome back to the Guardian’s live coverage of the fallout from former NSA contractor Edward Snowden’s revelations about US and UK surveillance. Here are today’s headlines: • The Law Society is considering issuing new guidance to solicitors across England and Wales amid growing concern that the government's mass online surveillance operations are undermining their ability to take legal cases against the state, report Matthew Taylor and Nick Hopkins. Lawyers representing people who make serious complaints against the police, army or security services fear the industrial-scale collection of email and phone messages revealed by the Guardian over the past four months is threatening the confidential relationship between them and their clients, jeopardising a crucial plank of the criminal justice system. "These are absolutely fundamental issues," said Shamik Dutta, from Bhatt Murphy lawyers in London. "The NSA revelations are having a chilling effect on the way a crucial part of the justice system operates. Individuals who are making serious allegations of wrongdoing against the state are becoming increasingly concerned about whether the information they share with their lawyers will remain confidential." • GCHQ is probably intercepting legally privileged communications between lawyers and their clients, according to a detailed claim filed on behalf of eight Libyans involved in politically sensitive compensation battles with the UK, reports Owen Bowcott. The accusation has been lodged with Britain's most secret court, the investigatory powers tribunal (IPT), which examines complaints about the intelligence services and government use of covert surveillance. Most of its hearings are in private. The allegation has emerged in the wake of the Guardian's revelations about extensive monitoring by GCHQ of the internet and telephone calls, chiefly through its Tempora programme. • The editor of the New York Times, Jill Abramson, has confirmed that senior British officials attempted to persuade her to hand over secret documents leaked by the former National Security Agency contractor Edward Snowden, reports Ed Pilkington in New York. Giving the newspaper's first official comments on the incident, Abramson said that she was approached by the UK embassy in Washington after it was announced that the New York Times was collaborating with the Guardian to explore some of the files disclosed by Snowden. Among the files are several relating to the activities of GCHQ, the agency responsible for signals interception in the UK. "They were hopeful that we would relinquish any material that we might be reporting on, relating to Edward Snowden. Needless to say I considered what they told me, and said no," Abramson told the Guardian in an interview to mark the International Herald Tribune's relaunch as the International New York Times. Read the full interview here. • Edward Snowden has said that the mass surveillance programmes used by the US to tap into phone and internet connections around the world are making people less safe. In short video clips posted by the WikiLeaks website on Friday, Snowden said that the NSA's mass surveillance, which he disclosed before fleeing to Russia, "puts us at risk of coming into conflict with our own government". View the video clips below: Edward Snowden speaks about the NSA's mass surveillance programme • The Guardian's critics say journalists cannot be trusted to judge what may damage national security, writes investigative journalist Nick Davies. But the press’s track record shows it to be more trustworthy than politicians or spooks, he says, also making a point about the proposed communications data bill, which is now stalled: It's instructive to look back from our vantage point, post-Snowden, to consider what was happening only two years ago when the government attempted to introduce new legislation which came to be known as the snooper's charter. If the oversight politicians are as well-informed as they claim, they must have known that this was in part a cynical attempt to create retrospective legal cover for surveillance tools that were already secretly being used, but they said nothing. And when parliament refused to pass that law, clearly indicating that there was no democratic mandate for those tools, they still stayed silent. • And a Guardian leader column asks whether politicians can be trusted to supervise the security services.  Do those who have oversight really understand today's technologies? And are they themselves free of personal inclinations? The former home secretary Jack Straw has been critical of the Guardian's reporting. But his own life and career raise their own questions. In his autobiography there is a revealing passage in which MI5 tells him in 1974 that he and his family have been under surveillance since Mr Straw was a teenager. They questioned him about his sexuality. They believed (probably falsely) that his sister was a communist. MI5 had notes of a pub conversation he had had with a "politically suspect" friend years earlier. Many people would find this deeply disturbing. Not Mr Straw, who was "neither surprised nor shocked". Is it reassuring for the rest of us that Mr Straw went on to have responsibility for the work of our spy agencies as home and foreign secretary? Mr Straw accepted the unreliable intelligence assessments which led us into war in Iraq. He faces troubling questions (and civil proceedings) about rendition. He backed secret courts. He supported blocking the Serious Fraud Office inquiry into corruption at British Aerospace. Quis custodiet? The answer, for many people, wouldn't be Jack Straw. Which is merely illustrative of a question which won't go away. We’ll have live coverage of all today’s developments here throughout the day. You can read last week’s blog here. Updated at 1.04pm BST