The Guardian has enjoyed plenty of support from editors across the world for publishing its series of revelations on the NSA's global surveillance network leaked by Edward Snowden. The support has been impressive. It includes editors from the US, Germany, France, Spain, Italy, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, Poland, Austria, Israel, India, Argentina and Australia. All of them expressed in different ways their concerns about government interference in the exercise of press freedom. And none was as heartfelt as that by Ricardo Kirschbaum, editor-in-chief of the newspaper, Clarín, based in the Argentinian capital, Buenos Aires. In October last year, I reported that the Global Editors' Network had raised the alarm about a decision by the administration of Argentina's president, Cristina Kirchner, to seize control the paper's publisher, Grupo Clarín. Her attempts to do so were enshrined in a controversial media law that has been the subject of a long-running legal battle. In August this year, The Guardian's Latin America corespondent, Jonathan Watts, reported that the country's supreme court was due to deliver its verdict within weeks. But two months have passed and the latest news, yet again, is that the court's ruling is weeks away. The dispute centres on Kirchner's desire to curb monopolies and create a more plural media landscape. But publishers, editors and journalists - and not just those working for Grupo Clarín - believe she is aiming to dismantle and tame a critical press. Under the proposed law, media ownership would be capped. For example, no company would be able to control more than 35% of the broadcast market. This would mean Grupo Clarín being forced to dispose of more than 130 broadcasting licences and it would therefore lose a huge chunk of its revenues. Currently, the group is Argentina's biggest newspaper publisher with seven titles and a news agency. It owns the second most popular TV channel, three provincial channels and 10 radio stations plus 158 broadcasting licences and a 60% control of the cable market. But Kirschbaum, in an email to this newspaper, says the government controls (directly or indirectly) 80% of the Argentine media. Kirchner believes the breaking up the Clarín group, and other big media corporations, would aid democracy. On Clarín's behalf, Kirschbaum argues that her real aim is to control the media. In this he is supported by other non-Clarín papers, such as La Nación and Perfil. Kirschbaum, quoted in the Daily Telegraph last week, said: "Clarín Group is suffering constant and ferocious harassment on the part of the government… "They [the government] are not only looking to silence the Clarín group, but any voice that is out of line with the official discourse."