2.54pm BST Select committee clerks help MPs prepare questions for sessions like this and today it seemed as if the strategy was straightforward: collect every story published by the Daily Mail over the last 12 months knocking the BBC, divide them up amongst the committee and then go through them one by one, seeing what Lord Patten, the BBC Trust chairman, and Tony Hall, the director general, have to say. As you can imagine, there are plenty of such stories on file, and the whole session went on for ages. At one point Patten said he was "amazed" by how much coverage the BBC got in the papers. "I wish Syria featured more," he said. By chance, there was a select committee hearing on Syria today. But I bet it didn't last as long as this one. Here are the main points from the hearing. • Patten sought to to downplay the scale of the £3m-plus severance sweeteners given to departing senior BBC executives, arguing that it is about half the cost of what BSkyB and BT pay to air half a Premiership match. [I'd like to raise] one other point that does not in any way excuse the way in which, for years, severance payments have been handled. In the two periods covered by KPMG and National Audit Office [investigations] the BBC overspent on severance payments by £3.8m. It is about what other TV networks would pay for televising the first half of a Premiership football match. • He said that public accounts committee hearing in September which saw senior BBC managers arguing with each other in public about severance payments had been a "car crash". • He declined an invitation to say that Mark Thompson, the former BBC director general, had misled the public accounts committee when talking about Mark Byford's pay-off. Thompson may have been using a different definition of "contractual" from the one used by the National Audit Office, Patten said. • Patten said it had been "a bad year" for the BBC, but not necessarily the worse in its history. The BBC had consumed "buckets of contrition", he said. • He played down his own responsibility for things that had gone wrong at the BBC. Speaking about the severance payments, he said:  When I became chairman of the Trust, having read the charter and looked at the role of the Trust, I certainly didn’t expect that people would think I was running the personnel department of the BBC. With reference to the BBC's failed digital programme, he also said that he would not have taken the job of Trust chairman if he thought it meant being in charge of major IT projects. The BBC Trust "tends to get blamed for things beyond its control," he said. He went on: "That's life. At 69 I'm beyond ambition." • He said it was a "delusion" to think that changing the way the BBC was run would solve its problems. • Hall said he wanted to reduce the number of managers at the corporation to produce a "simpler, slimmer BBC". • Hall said the BBC was still hoping to broadcast a Panorama investigation into the use of Comic Relief funds. There was a "proper story to tell", he said. But he also seemed to confirm that the broadcast had been delayed. When you have a programme which is controversial, and right to be controversial, and making big claims and right to be making big claims about things, you shouldn't set a transmission date. You should absolutely ensure there's proper time for proper processes to be gone through ...I very much hope this programme will be transmitted but I don't know yet what the substance of the allegations that are being made are and are they right or wrong? • Hall praised Ian Katz, the new Newsnight editor (and former Guardian deputy editor) and Mishal Husain, the new Today presenter. Katz was showing how new leadership could revive a programme. And Husain was “doing absolutely brilliantly” , Hall said. • Hall said that at least one manager had left the BBC following allegations of bullying. This came when he was asked about an NUJ dossier making allegations of bullying by management. Other cases were still be addressed, Hall said. • He said a new bullying helpline was being set up at the BBC. • Patten said the BBC would not object to the NAO having unfettered access to the BBC's accounts, provided it did not get involved in editorial matters. Maria Miller, the culture secretary, has said the NAO is getting new powers over the BBC. Patten said how this would work was still being resolved, but he implied he did not see any objections.  • Hall said said that Lisa Opie, a BBC executive earning more than £200,000 a year, was "daft" to blog about how tired she got doing a second job running a cafe. But in principle he defended the right of BBC staff to have jobs outside the corporation. He wanted the BBC to be "more fluid, more porous". On Twitter the Conservative MP Rob Wilson condemned this position. Hall says he'll allow BBC managers to cont. to have more than 1 paid job even if on Â£250k. The gravy train rolls on for senior managers!— Rob Wilson (@RobWilson_RDG) October 22, 2013 • Patten said the BBC would publish a report by consultants PWC on the way it wasted almost £100m on a digital initiative. It was a "wretched business" and a "lamentable" story, he said. • Hall defended Helen Boaden, the BBC head of radio who was criticised by a report looking into how the BBC handled revelations about Jimmy Savile. Hall said that he was "very confident" in Boaden. Asked about the way Boaden and Mark Thompson, the former director general, gave contradictory accounts about whether they had discussed the Newsnight Savile investigation, Hall said: "It is perfectly possible for two people to have different views about something and to both think they’re right." • Hall revealed the make-up of the audience for Question Time. It was 30% Conservative supporters, 30% Labour supporters, 10% Lib Dems, 10% Ukip or another minor party, 5% others and 15% don't knows, he said. • Hall said the BBC had to guard against "metropolitan bias". When the Tory MP Philip Davies told him the BBC orders more copies of the Guardian than any other paper, Hall agreed that this was odd.  Now I know about it, the imbalance is one thing, but the numbers are another, so I'll probably conclude we cut back on the number of papers that we use. People need to read papers but they need to read a broad range of papers, clearly. Updated at 5.50pm BST