Top eight stories on MediaGuardian ITV to axe Who Wants To Be A Millionaire Million-pound TV quiz to end after 15 years as host Chris Tarrant calls it a day Public show support for investigative reporting Survey finds media industry more pessimistic about investigative reporting than their readers as editors debate its survival Tony Hall backs BBC executives' right to second jobs BBC director general says there are benefits to the corporation becoming 'much more fluid and much more porous' Lord McAlpine libel row with Sally Bercow settled Sally Bercow has apologised for 'irresponsible use of Twitter' and agreed to pay undisclosed damages to peer, court told Radio boss brushes off royal hoax call Chairman of Australian radio network plays down impact of on-air stunt that led to nurse killing herself Stuart Hall to be stripped of his OBE Broadcaster, who was convicted of 14 counts of indecent assault against girls over two-decade period, will have award revoked Sun apologises over Madeleine McCann joke Paper's editor writes to parents of missing girl after tweet from its official Twitter account about Tamera Foster Dave Lee Travis denies assaults Former Radio 1 DJ pleads not guilty to 14 counts of indecent assault and one count of sexual assault Top comment on MediaGuardian Why politicians and celebrities never say what they really think With so many people eager to start a nontroversy on social media, it's safer to be bland, as Nigella Lawson found out after a recent interview Today's headlines The Guardian Great British Bake Off's Ruby Tandoh on media criticism. P1,9 Government drops 'go home' van ads. P5 Tory MP attacks Edward Snowden files as breach of national security. P6 Great British Bake Off final coverage. P9 Sally Bercow to pay damages over Lord McAlpine tweet. P9 Tony Hall defends BBC payoffs in front of MPs. P9 David Cameron criticises Facebook over beheading videos. P11 Stuart Hall to lose OBE after sex conviction. P12 ITV's Who Wants To Be A Millionaire axed as Chris Tarrant quits. P12 Apple launches new iPads. P15 Facebook's Mark Zuckerberg is highest-paid US boss. P27 Editorial: Facebook and beheading videos. P34 Daily Telegraph Parents of overweight children will be told to cut back on TV. P1 Australia radio boss insults 'memory of dead nurse'. P2 David Cameron attacks Facebook over execution videos. P3 Comment P21 Has the topics on Mumsnet got too steamy? P3 Director general admits the BBC is too leftwing and metropolitan. P4 BBC film-maker criticised for saying foxes don't harm children. P5 Great British Bake Off outsider snatches victory. P7 Chris Tarrant calls time on Who Wants To Be A Millionaire? P7 Stuart Hall loses OBE over child sex abuse. P9 Sally Bercow has paid Lord McAlpine £15,000 for libellous tweet. P11 Dave Lee Travis pleads not guilty to 15 sex offences. P14 Apple flights back with a new iPad. B5 Financial Times Hackers set off alarm at welfare website. P2 Daniel Loeb's Third Point buys Nokia stock. P15 Nokia sets out mobile future for Microsoft. P19 eBay in move to offer same-day delivery. P19 EE builds on headstart in 4G rollout. P21 Netflix shares slip back after bank warns of 'elevated' price. P31 The Times Facebook attacked by David Cameron for allowing beheading films. P4 Dave Lee Travis denies sex assaults. P5 Great British Bake Off winner revealed. P7 BBC chief admits they 'cocked up' on bullying claims. P16 Apple launches thinner iPad as tablet wars hot up. P17 Sally Bercow tells tweeters to be sensible after paying Lord McAlpine damages. P21 Stuart Hall has been stripped of his OBE. P26 Leader: Facebook should reconsiders its decision to allow decapitation videos. P32 Google unveils new tools designed to shield political dissidents on the web. P38 The Independent Sally Bercow settles McAlpine case and tweets apology. P2 Review of The Great British Bake Off final. P3 David Bowie makes radio DJ debut with show recorded in 1973. P9 David Cameron criticises Facebook on beheading videos. P9 Three BBC executives in disciplinary hearings over bullying. P14 Free software for Macs steals IPad's show. P15 Netflix to take on Hollywood with its own movies. P25 Dave Lee Travis denies 15 sex charges. P26 Stuart Hall to be stripped of OBE. P27 i At least three BBC executives face harassment charges. P2 Great British Bake Off winner revealed. P11 Simon Kelner: Ryanair boss crash-landed on Twitter. P16 Apple's iPad slims down to combat rivals. P20 Sally Bercow pays £15,000 for Twitter libel. P22 Australian radio boss brushes off nurse suicide. P24 Wall Street Journal Europe Apple unveils new iPads and operating system. P1,18 Editorial: HKTV protest. P14 Bill Gates buys stake in Spanish construction company. P17 Microsoft tests web-connected eyewear. P18 Nokia shows off first tablet. P19 Daniel Loeb's Third Point buys Nokia stock. P19 Daily Mail Great British Bake Off winner revealed. P7 David Cameron attacks Facebook for lifting its block on beheading videos. P6 Comment P14 Security services likely to lose track of terrorists due to Guardian leaks. P6 Great British Bake Off's Ruby Tandoh could be the next Nigella Lawson. P7 Sally Bercow returns to Twitter after paying £15k for McAlpine libel. P12 BBC chief says they must be quicker to tackle bias. P16 BBC director-general defends BBC staff who take second jobs. P16 BBC tells male Strictly Come Dancing contestants to cover up. P19 Stuart Hall loses his OBE. P30 Apple ticks off tablet war with its thinnest iPad. P31 Daily Express Sally Bercow pays £15,000 damages and apologies for Tweet. P2 Great British Bake Off winner revealed. P3 Who Wants To Be A Millionaire to be axed. P5 Stuart Hall stripped of his OBE. P5 Dave Lee Travis faces trial after he denies 15 sex charges. P35 TV viewers help boost EE subscribers. P56 The Sun Guardian's spy leaks criticised by minister. P2 Editorial: Facebook should be ashamed over beheading videos. P6 David Cameron criticises Facebook over beheading videos. P8 Government drops 'go home' van ads. P8 Sally Bercow to pay damages over Lord McAlpine tweet. P8 Great British Bake Off coverage. P12-13 Dave Lee Travis pleads not guilty to sex charges. P19 Apple launches new iPads. P23 Nokia unveils its first tablet. P23 Snooker veteran Steve Davis to join ITV's I'm a Celebrity. TV Biz P1 Simon Cowell plans shakeup in underperforming The X Factor. TV Biz P1 Channel 4 to launch celeb winter sports contest The Jump. TV Biz P2 ITV's Who Wants To Be A Millionaire axed as Chris Tarrant quits. TV Biz P3 Daily Mirror Male Strictly Come Dancing contestants under order to keep their shirts on. P3 Who Wants To Be a Millionaire? to be axed. P9 Dave Lee Travis denies a string of sex offences as he appears in court. P17 Stuart Hall stripped of his OBE. P17 David Cameron slams Facebook for lifting beheadings video ban. P21 BBC chief says BBC will air Comic Relief probe. P22 Interview with Great British Bake Off Winner Francis Quinn. P22 Lord McAlpine's libel action against Sally Bercow settled at the high court. P25 Boss of Australian royal prank call radio station dismisses it as 'shit happens'. P29 Daily Star Great British Bake Off winner revealed. P1, P10 Facebook sparks outrage by lifting ban on execution videos. P2 Who Wants To Be A Millionaire? to be axed as Chris Tarrant wants to step down. P5 Stuart Hall to be stripped of his OBE. P9 David Bowie's radio show from 1973 to hit the airwaves today. P16 Sally Bercow pays Lord McAlpine £15,00 for libellous tweet. P21 Ryanair Boss Michael O'Leary savaged during Twiiter Q&A session. P22 DJ Dave Lee Travis pleads not guilty to 15 sex charges. P25 Go to MediaGuardian