Angela Merkel has demand explanations from Barack Obama over reports that the US National Security Agency was monitoring her mobile phone. Photograph: Jewel Samad/AFP/Getty Images The international debate prompted by the leaking of the NSA files by the US whistleblower Edward Snowden led to the disclosure that Angela Merkel's mobile telephone was allegedly monitored by the US, a Labour MP has claimed. David Winnick, a member of the home affairs select committee, said the disclosure showed it was right for parliament to hold a debate on an "orchestrated campaign of intimidation" against the Guardian, which has published a series of articles about mass surveillance based on the leaked NSA files. Shortly after Winnick spoke it was announced that parliament would hold a three-hour debate next week on the oversight of the UK's spying agencies. The debate, which will be held in Westminster Hall, was granted after an application by Julian Huppert, the Liberal Democrat MP and civil liberties campaigner, Tom Watson, the Labour MP who investigated phone hacking, and Dominic Raab, the Tory MP who led a rebellion against the communications data bill, otherwise known as the "snooper's charter". The debate will be held next Thursday afternoon and follows one led by Tory MP Julian Smith to highlight his call to the Metropolitan police to investigate whether the Guardian has broken the law. The announcement of the debate came as the allegation that the US National Security Agency monitored Merkel's mobile phone threatened to overshadow a two-day European summit that opens in Brussels on Thursday afternoon. François Hollande, the French president, who complained to the White House earlier this week when Le Monde reported that the NSA was targeting the private phone calls and text messages of millions of French people, is expected to discuss the latest surveillance allegations with Merkel in Brussels. Downing Street indicated that David Cameron was unlikely to join Hollande in calling for the matter to be formally placed on the summit agenda. Asked whether the prime minister has received assurances from the US that his phone has not been bugged, the spokesman said: "I am not going to comment on matters of security or intelligence." Asked whether Cameron had any views about the monitoring of Merkel's phone, the spokesman said: "Again, I am not going to comment. Same answer." David Winnick said the allegations about the monitoring of Merkel's mobile telephone would not have been aired without the Snowden leaks. Speaking during the weekly session of business questions in the Commons, Winnick said: "Would the leader [of the Commons] agree that if we had a debate in the chamber on the orchestrated campaign of intimidation against the Guardian newspaper, that would be an opportunity for some of us to point out that if it hadn't been for the Snowden disclosures the fact that the German chancellor's mobile phone had been monitored for some time by the US intelligence gathering would not have been known? "Surely the message should be about Snowden, let's have more disclosures because undoubtedly what the Guardian is publishing is in the national interest." Tom Brake, the Liberal Democrat deputy leader of the Commons, said: "Clearly I don't agree with him in terms of what he says is an orchestrated campaign against the Guardian newspaper. I think clearly there is a need for the issues of public interest the Guardian wants to highlight to be balanced with any security implications of any material they put out into the public domain."