'In the US, the Bill of Rights is seen as a sacred text. As Montecarlo2 writes, things are rarely seen so clearly here.' Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian In this series Comment is free writers and editors want to highlight some of the best comments on the site. Each week, either an editor or the author of a recent piece will pick a comment that they think contributes to the debate. Hopefully it will give staff and readers an opportunity to see how thought-provoking such contributions can be and allow great posts the chance to be seen by a wider audience. This week Jonathan Freedland chose a comment by MonteCarlo2 on his article on the GCHQ and NSA scandal. The US government is concerned with the actions of the NSA because citizens have rights expressly declared in the Constitution. The NSA has violated those rights which delegitimizes the government itself. So the situation is taken seriously. In Britain, there are no guaranteed rights, so Parliament's only beef with the GCHQ is to wet their beak too. The situation is more relaxed, as the various parties are confident they can arrive at a mutually beneficial arrangement. The only concern is reserved for trouble makers like the Guardian, who insist on keeping the citizens informed. Jonathan Freedland explains why he chose the comment. This comment stood out because it tackles a question I myself am fascinated by, but did not have room to address in the original column: "why?" I noted that the US has reacted so much more robustly – both its press and politicians – to the NSA revelations than we have in Britain, but did not have the space to explore why. Montecarlo2 suggests the explanation lies in the fact that the US has a constitution and we in Britain do not. In the US, the Bill of Rights is seen as a sacred text, with any violation intolerable. As Montecarlo2 writes, things are rarely seen so clearly here. Many Britons are still prone to defer to, say, the security services. Americans see them – and all government – as their servants, who should be disciplined when they get out of line. (Mind you, I'm still not quite sure what Montecarlo2 means by "wet their beak" here.) • Let us know your thoughts on this exchange in the comments below, and tell us whether it has given you a new insight into the issue