Sir Harold Evans: honoured at Media Society event. Photograph: Felix Clay for the Guardian Former Times and Sunday Times editor Sir Harold Evans was honoured for his life-long contribution to journalism at a special celebration on Wednesday night, at which particular tribute was paid to his investigative reporting. Speaking at the Media Society annual dinner, Alan Rusbridger, editor-in-chief of the Guardian, said: "The big targets he [Evans] took on included governments, judges, spies and enormous corporations." Those that Evans challenged during his 14-year tenure at the Sunday Times, Rusbridger said, were "intimidating, frightening enemies to make". Rusbridger made reference to Evans's work in exposing Kim Philby as a Soviet spy. He said: "Today it seems amazing that anyone would try to stop a newspaper from investigating the work of a double agent. But the government of the day did." James Harding, the former Times editor who is now BBC director of news and current affairs, said: "[Evans] transformed the lives of all of us by understanding and appreciating that investigative journalism defines us. It earns us our troublesome place in society." Speaking of his experience of working with Evans at the Sunday Times, renowned photojournalist Don McCullin summed up his former editor as a "really decent human being". The event in Mayfair, which formed part of the Media Society's 40th anniversary lineup, was hosted by BBC Radio 4 Today programme presenter James Naughtie. The Media Society's 2013 bursary award was presented to David Westhead's Wembley to Soweto, a project using photography to inspire young people which originated in South Africa. Evans began his career as a reporter at a local paper in 1944 aged 16. After stints at the Manchester Evening News and the Northern Echo, he became editor of the Sunday Times in 1967. Known for championing investigative journalism and building the Insight team, Evans's era at the paper is most often defined by its campaign for compensation for British Thalidomide children. Speaking on the Today programme on Wednesday morning, Evans – who is now an editor-at-large for Reuters – discussed the recent criticism the Guardian has faced in publishing Edward Snowden's leaks on UK and US security services' surveillance activity. "I don't take a simple, absolutist position on this," he said, explaining that in his experience when national security had been raised as a reason not to publish, on examination it "proved spurious". "So I'm always very suspicious of the cry for suppression [of journalism] on national security [grounds]," he said. "Having said that, the government does have a responsibility to protect its citizens so I'm not simply for a free-for-all and we don't know what the answer is on Snowden."