10.33am BST Here are the main points from Nick Clegg's round of morning interviews and from LBC's Call Clegg. • Clegg said that if David Cameron was proposing slashing funding entirely for so-called "green" measures, that would be an own goal. What Cameron was proposing yesterday was not entirely clear, Clegg said. I'm not frankly entirely sure what rolling back green levies, if removing all green levies which help two million people on very low incomes, which help support thousands of jobs in our green renewable energy sector, if that is what is meant I think that would be an own goal. • He said "green levies" were not the main reason for energy bills going up anyway. Some 60% of the increase was down to price rises in the wholesale market, he said. • He said that if the Tories thought they could turn their back on the need to tackle climate change, they were wrong. • He said the Lib Dems would not accept the removal of energy initiatives that help the poor. (Sometimes these are seen as "green" measures funded by "green" levies, but arguably they are welfare measures.0 Of course I'm certainly not going to accept - I don't think anyone would want us to accept - simply scrapping a whole system of levies, which for instance help two million of the poorest households in this country. We will provide £135 to two million low income households, which is funded from one of these levies. This was a reference to the warm homes discount. • He hinted that energy bills could be cut. Some of the measures funded by "green levies" could be funded from general government spending, he said. He suggested that he and Cameron would be able to reach an agreement on this over the coming weeks. We will stress test all these different levies. If we can deliver those objectives of keeping the lights on, insulating people's homes, helping the fuel poor, supporting our green economy for less - of course I don't want to see an extra penny on people's bills than is actually necessary - that is what we will do, as we always do in the coalition whatever our differences, we resolve them. He said an announcement would be made between between now and the autumn statement. • He said Cameron's announcement "wasn’t something that I was fully expecting". He said that he heard about it from his office, not from Cameron in person, but he refused to go into detail. • He described Ed Miliband's proposal for an energy bill freeze as a "24-carat con". It is a con, of course it's a con. If you try and fix prices in the way that Ed Miliband wants, prices will go up, jobs will go down, investment will go down. It's an economically illiterate con, it's a 24-carat con.  • He defended his call for teachers at free schools to either have to be qualified or to be seeking a teaching qualification. "Freedom does not mean anarchy," he said. Parents were entitled to certain assurances. It was different for private schools (where unqualified teachers are allowed) because they were paying themselves and they could "take their chances". • He said he did not support David Davis's suggestion that all police officers should be equipped with equipment to record their dealings with members of the public. There was a limit to how much you should monitor people, he said. • He accused Lord Sugar of being "thin-skinned". Clegg was responding to Sugar calling him an "idiot" on Twitter. (Sugar's comments seem to have been prompted by Clegg at one point citing Sugar as an example of a wealthy pensioner who could afford to lose certain benefits) (See 9.34am.) Here's what Clegg said. He's slightly thin-skinned. He drives around in this great big Bentley on primetime television, he wafts around the House of Lords in ermine, and then he seems to be very offended when I point out that he has got a bob or two. I don't see why someone like him should be entitled to a winter fuel payment. No doubt, having said that, I will get another torrent of classic Sugar tweet-abuse this morning. Anyway, that's the way I see things. I've taken the quotes from PoliticsHome and the Press Association. Sadly, the people who interviewed Clegg did not ask the one question I would have asked him about energy this morning. I would like to know what he says about this passage from Matthew d'Ancona's book about the coalition, In It Together. Clegg was dismayed by what he described to aides as 'a flagrant reversal of a totemic commitment' [the Conservatives' move away from support for green measures]. The Lib Dem leader complained: 'When I raise it with Osborne he just says: "I don't believe in this agenda. Of course we had to say this stuff in Opposition."" D'Ancona says Osborne denies taking "such a crass position". But it would be nice to know if Clegg remembers the conversation. Updated at 10.40am BST