Top eight stories on MediaGuardian Press seeks judicial review of royal charter Newspaper Publishers Association wants high court to quash government's decision to proceed with parliament's preferred system Twitter valued at $11bn in IPO filing Twitter sets out fresh details of share sale in regulatory filing, as it plans to sell 70m shares in IPO on 6 November Steven Gerrard stars in Xbox One ad Microsoft also recruits Star Trek's Zachary Quinto for multimillion-dollar marketing battle against Sony's PS4 launch Pinterest valued at $3.8bn after funding Image-sharing site raises $225m from venture capital firms and says investment enables it to pursue goals 'more aggressively' Google breaks 2005 promise never to show banner ads on search results As price per web adverts falls, Google has begun to offer some advertisers more visibility for ads – going back on 2005 promise BBC iPlayer: viewers turn away from PCs Growing popularity of portable devices highlighted by figures that also reveal the mobile app has been downloaded 20m times Lord McAlpine settles libel action with Alan Davies QI panellist agrees to pay £15,000 damages and warns other other Twitter users about the dangers of tweeting Metro website traffic soars by a third Site's daily browsers rise to 737,176 in September, as Mirror network loses many of gains made after launch of Sun paywall Top comment on MediaGuardian Sir Harold Evans praised for taking on 'big targets' Media Society event honours former Times and Sunday Times editor for his intrepid attitude to investigative reporting Today's headlines The Guardian Prince Cahrles opens up in Time magazine interview. P5 Newspaper publishers launch legal challenge to press royal charter. P9 Alan Davies to pay £15,000 libel damages over Lord McAlpine tweet. P11 Viewers switching to tablets to watch iPlayer. P20 Carl Icahn pressures Apple over buyback. P32 Twitter sets early share price, valuing itself at $11bn. P31 Daily Telegraph Alan Davies to pay £15,000 libel damages over Lord McAlpine tweet. P20 Guardian reports on Edward Snowden leaks 'criminal not virtuous', says QC. P20 Amazon's rapid rise 'is good for Britain'. Business P1,4 Paul Hollywood book boosts Bloomsbury's profits. Business P1 Core advertising business helps WPP beat forecasts. Business P3 Carl Icahn pressures Apple over buyback. Business P3 Financial Times Ireland moves to close apple tax loophole. P8 Mature markets boost for WPP. P18 YouTube poised to take on Spotify with music stream. P18 Carl Icahn eyes bigger Apple stake buyback. P20 Google signs cross-media adverts deal with Publicis. P21 The Times Lord Carlile of Berriew, says the Guardian 'has given away how we catch terrorists'. P4 Comedian Alan Davies pays damages to Lord McAlpine. P8 Tories offer changes on press regulation as papers go to court. P21 Leader: The press is opposing an illiberal royal charter proposed by politicians. P38 Google tests large banner ads above its search results for the first time. P41 RSPCA faces ad ban over badger 'extermination'. P42 Twitter will sell 70m shares at between $17 and $20. P55 WPP announces a 5% increase in like-for-like revenue. P61 Investor Carl Icahn urges Apple to start an $150bn share buyback. P61 The Independent Newspapers set to ignore royal charter on press regulations. P1, P2 Supermarkets set to splash out on Christmas ads with high profile TV slots. P24 New browser tool will shine light on who's tracking web users. P25 Comedian Alan Davies pays damages for retweeting false allegations. P27 Michael Jackson is Forbes magazines highest paid dead star. P37 Revenue rise lifts WPP shares to record high. P56 Investor Carl Icahn raises stake in Apple by 22%. P57 i New web tool allows users to find out who is tracking them. P2 Joanna Lumley to play the Queen in TV adaptation of David Walliams' children's book. P3 Plans for new press watchdog unveiled. P7 Simon Kelner: Russell Brand's Newsnight Interview. P16 Supermarkets set to splash out on Christmas TV ad campaigns. P19 Russia's biggest search engine's profits surge. P47 WPP shares driven to a record high. P49 Wall Street Journal Europe 'Sidecar' deals test law on US TV station consolidation. P14-15 Carl Icahn raises Apple stake and urges buyback. P19,23 Daily Mail BBC attacked for giving royal christening bottom billing. P6 How Newsnight has become the Guardian on TV. P15 Newspapers to launch legal challenge against plans to control press. P20 Comedian Alan Davies says sorry for Lord McAlpine Twitter slur. P29 WPP's third quarter update reveals revenues up by 7.4%. P79 Daily Express Frederick Forsyth: Great British Bake Off contestants should stop crying. P15 Lord Sugar unleashes a torrent of abuse at Nick Clegg on Twitter. P22 WPP sees revenues grow. P65 The Sun Russell Brand dubbed a 'trivial man' by Jeremy Paxman on Newsnight. P2 Louis Walsh 'having second thoughts about quitting The X Factor'. P3 Alan Davies to pay £15,000 libel damages over Lord McAlpine tweet. P41 Sir Elton John to perform on The X Factor. TV Biz P1 Louis Walsh wants to stay on The X Factor. TV Biz P1 BBC to axe I Love My Country and That Puppet Game Show. TV Biz P2 EastEnders coverage. TV Biz P3 Daily Mirror Louis Walsh is having second thoughts about quitting The X Factor. P3 Comedian Alan Davies pays £15,000 in damages to Lord McAlpine. P11 Open letter to the Queen from leading press groups, urging her not to sign the Royal Charter. P12 Prison chiefs have put Stuart Hall on suicide watch following further charges. P15 Daily Star Alan Davies issues an apology for libelling Lord McAlpine. P20 Thug caught by police following comment son Facebook. P29 Jimmy Saville's chauffeur arrested in connection to new child sex abuse allegations. P33 Go to MediaGuardian