The Guardian today announced that former Prime Minister Julia Gillard will write columns on an ongoing basis for Guardian Australia. The agreement will see Gillard contribute her perspective on key national and international issues and follows the success of her 5,000 word essay, published exclusively by Guardian Australia in September, which sparked thousands of comments and social media interactions. "We are delighted that Julia Gillard has agreed to build on her existing relationship with Guardian Australia. The news further demonstrates our commitment to providing Australian readers with high quality, serious and lively journalism. Gillard's insight and commentary will add a valuable perspective to important stories we want to bring to our Australian audience," said Katharine Viner, editor-in-chief of Guardian Australia. With a global digital audience of 40 million unique users per month, the Guardian is the third largest English newspaper website in the world. Guardian Australia launched in May 2013, offering Australian audiences high-quality, independent and innovative journalism; and connecting some of the best writers in Australia with the best of the Guardian's global journalism. Commenting on the announcement Gillard said: "My essays to date have been warmly received by The Guardian and its readership in Australia and worldwide. I am really looking forward to working with Guardian Australia and believe its Open Journalism approach to news is the right way forward across a very challenging media landscape. I'll be working closely with Kath to bring a distinctive perspective to the Guardian and its readers around the world." Julia Gillard's previous columns can be found by clicking the below links: http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/13/julia-gillard-labor-purpose-future http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/oct/23/us-shutdown-congress Readers can access Guardian Australia content 24 hours a day via theguardian.com, both on desktop and mobile, follow @GuardianAus on Twitter and can also download the Guardian App for Android and the Guardian App for iOS which both have Australian edition options. -ends- About Guardian News & Media Guardian News & Media (GNM) publishes theguardian.com, the third largest English-speaking newspaper website in the world (comScore, August 2013). Since launching its US and Australia digital editions in 2011 and 2013 respectively, traffic from outside of the UK now represents over two-thirds of the Guardian's total digital audience. In the UK, GNM publishes the Guardian newspaper six days a week and the world's oldest Sunday newspaper, The Observer. The newspapers were this year named the most trustworthy, accurate and reliable newspapers in the UK. The Guardian, which was first published in 1821, is most recently renowned for its trailblazing partnership with WikiLeaks in 2010, its globally acclaimed investigation into phone hacking and the launch of its groundbreaking digital-first strategy in 2011 and its agenda-setting NSA and GCHQ revelations following disclosures by whistleblower Edward Snowden. The Scott Trust Ltd The ultimate owner of the Guardian is The Scott Trust, which was originally created as a trust in 1936 to safeguard the title's journalistic freedom. In 2008 it was replaced by a limited company with the same core purpose of the original trust: to secure the financial and editorial independence of the Guardian in perpetuity, while its subsidiary aims are to champion its principles and to promote freedom of the press in the UK and elsewhere. Other than to cover expense, The Scott Trust takes no dividend from the group's businesses, whose profits are instead reinvested to sustain journalism that is free from commercial or political interference. For further information please contact: Guardian Australia Team at Text100: GuardianAustralia@text100.com or tel: 02 9956 5733