David Cameron and Angela Merkel in Brussels. Photograph: Yves Herman/AFP/Getty Images Not for the first time over the past four months, David Cameron has found himself facing cringe-making questions about surveillance. Given the genuine fury of Germany and France over the activities of the US National Security Agency, perhaps Cameron could do little else other than sign up to Friday's European memorandum expressing concern at the way the US has been spying on world leaders. To those outside the diplomatic bubble, the statement might seem anodyne, but it is already being interpreted as a slap in the face to Washington because it talks of the US-EU partnership being "based on respect and trust, including as concerns the work and co-operation of secret services". The line in the memorandum warning that "a lack of trust could prejudice" counter-terrorism operations is particularly wounding for Cameron, seeing as Downing Street is desperate to claim that Edward Snowden's leaked documents – not the behaviour of the NSA or GCHQ – have been a gift to terrorists and criminals. But the PM is almost certainly nudging and winking at the Americans, too, letting them know he's not taking any European fury too seriously. He can't. Britain is the key ally of the US when it comes to intelligence gathering – GCHQ and the NSA are closer to each other than they are to their own domestic agencies. The NSA gives GCHQ tens of millions of pounds a year to fund programmes that Washington can take advantage of. It is highly likely any information gleaned from the NSA's snooping on Angela Merkel would have been shared with GCHQ, and it's even possible the eavesdropping was conducted through Menwith Hill, the RAF base in North Yorkshire that is a British base only in name. Menwith Hill is the NSA's surveillance hub in Europe. Snowden's documents have already shown that it intercepted the top-secret communications of the then Russian president, Dmitry Medvedev, during his visit to Britain for the G20 summit in 2009. The papers also show this information was then shared with high-ranking officials from Britain, Australia, Canada and New Zealand, the other members of the "five eyes" spying club. At the same summit, British spies were also snooping on other delegations, specifically from Turkey and South Africa. When the Intelligence Services Act was passed in 1994 it included a line – inserted at the last minute – that Britain's spy agencies could legitimately seek intelligence that would support the "economic wellbeing" of the country. This provision is one of the most opaque in the legislation and could be interpreted to justify espionage on just about any head of state or company chief executive, though this would require ministerial approval. Would No 10Downing Street want to know Merkel's innermost thoughts? Of course it would. Knowing the mind of the world's most powerful woman would be invaluable during summits and bilateral talks, particularly at a time when Britain's membership of the EU is a source of constant tension. So Cameron probably signed the memorandum with fingers crossed behind his back, knowing, perhaps, that Britain might have benefited from the NSA's surveillance on Merkel, and the 35 other world leaders it targeted.