Reading on mobile? Click here to watch trailer Captain America: The Winter Soldier Production year: 2014 Country: USA Directors: Anthony Russo, Joe Russo Cast: Chris Evans, Robert Redford, Scarlett Johansson More on this film See if this film is playing near you UK postcode: I have to say I'm a little surprised by the overwhelmingly positive critical reaction to Marvel's upcoming Thor: The Dark World, which seems to me to be a middling effort in the canon. Yet the new movie's current 86% "fresh" rating on Rotten Tomatoes certainly helps Captain America: The Winter Soldier, which might otherwise have been under pressure to return the Disney-owned studio to the top when it debuts next year. Ironically, the debut full trailer for Anthony and Joe Russo's film suggests this rather intriguing-looking superhero caper might not need the boost. With Captain America now firmly ensconced in the 21st century, and apparently no longer required to wear that hokey old 40s stars and stripes costume, the sequel to 2011's Captain America: The First Avenger already has a brusque, confident air of topical currency about it. Joe Johnston's film was ultimately let down by its period setting, specifically the sections where Steve Rogers marches across Europe with a ragtag band of US military stereotypes to take down the Nazi threat. Such scenes would have been better suited to Quentin Tarantino's deliberately over-the-top Inglourious Basterds; in a superhero film these interludes move the paradigm too far from the "grounded" rule that often saves these preposterous fantasy tales from descending into complete and utter farce. Thankfully Rogers is very much on his own in Captain America: The Winter Soldier, at least on an existential level. While Scarlett Johansson's Black Widow and Anthony Mackie's soaring new Falcon are also along for the ride, there's a sense here that Captain America is neither particularly comfortable working with superhero agency SHIELD, nor particularly keen on the hard-nosed dynamic espoused by the organisation that's supposed to be his new family. Robert Redford, as new SHIELD boss Alexander Pierce, and Samuel L Jackson's Nick Fury seem pretty keen to convince Rogers that it's perfectly cool to take out the bad guys before they've actually decided to do anything naughty. Cap's predictable/admirable response is that such utilitarian attitudes feel a long way from "freedom". We even see Rogers beset by a lift-load of what appear to be SHIELD agents: does The Winter Soldier see him going up against his newfound benefactors? Or has a bafflingly populous rogue element somehow found its way inside? If so, this sequel might just be a rather crowded affair, because we already know who the main enemy is intended to be. The titular Winter Soldier is Sebastian Stan's Bucky Barnes, Rogers's old comrade from the 1940s who was supposed to have plunged to his death last time out. He's now back from the dead with long hair and a bad attitude. In the comics, Barnes is gifted new powers by the Russians to take on Captain America, but it seems likely that Marvel will tie its new bad guy into a wider conspiracy involving SHIELD and its less delightful elements. Might there even be links to the nefarious organisations hinted at in Iron Man 3 and current television offshoot Marvel: Agents of SHIELD? Captain America: The Winter Soldier is the second Marvel movie to pick relatively untried directors, here in the shape of in-demand TV veterans the Russo brothers. Of course, The Avengers's Joss Whedon is overseeing the whole affair from his new position as studio uber-chief, and the sequel continues to employ plenty of Whedonesque wisecracking to offset the superhero silliness. In that sense it has a lot in common with Thor: The Dark World, which, as you'll be able to see for yourselves in UK and US cinemas in a matter of weeks, is in fact a surprisingly bright and breezy affair. The enormous $1.5bn success of The Avengers freed comic-book movies from the Christopher Nolan-sponsored formula of navel-gazing heroes struggling with their own inner demons as much as an outside world filled with villainy. But that doesn't mean these new Marvel concoctions are a cheap and cheesy return to the bad old days of 1990s big-screen superhero guff. Agents of SHIELD has already made several nods to the Edward Snowden revelations and the dangers of unfettered government organisations, and it looks as though Captain America: The Winter Soldier might enter the dark heart of the agency in a pleasingly intriguing manner. Old-school purist Cap going up against the "fight terror with terror" approach is a movie I'm definitely interested in catching. How about you? • Robert Redford lined up for Captain America: The Winter Soldier • Doctor Strange movie 'in active development' at Marvel