9.08am BST Welcome to our hub for all Edward Snowden, NSA and GCHQ-related developments around the world, as controversy over revelations leaked by the whistleblower continue to make headlines. As arguments rage over how much of our day to day life should be monitored in the name of security, we'll be tracking the growing global debate about privacy in the digital age. We'd like to know what you think about the whole NSA story, what you're worried about – and any new areas you'd like to read more about. Good morning and welcome to this week’s NSA live blog, with live coverage of all major developments resulting from Edward Snowden’s leak of information about US and UK surveillance to the Guardian. Le Monde has today published details from files leaked by Snowden, and we’ll have more details on their stories shortly. Here are today’s headlines: • The former cabinet minister Chris Huhne has called for an investigation into which Labour cabinet ministers signed off GCHQ's Tempora programme, the clandestine electronic surveillance programme revealed by leaks from the former US intelligence contractor Edward Snowden. Huhne, the Liberal Democrat who resigned from parliament after being jailed over lying about a speeding offence, has revealed the cabinet was not informed about Tempora, which was tested in 2008 and fully implemented in 2011. Writing in the Guardian, the former member of the coalition's national security council asks whether the Labour cabinet was similarly kept in the dark and suggests the decision to authorise the programme could yet be made subject to judicial review. You can read Huhne’s full Guardian article here. • With some Conservative MPs planning in a parliamentary debate tomorrow to make the case for the prosecution of the Guardian over the Snowden disclosures, the US ambassador to Britain, Matthew Barzun, rejected an opportunity to criticise the newspaper on Sunday, saying he wanted to focus on the importance of the debate about the tradeoffs between security and privacy. Barzun was appearing on the BBC's Andrew Marr Show for the first time since his arrival in London in June, and talked about the impact of the debate on national security created by Snowden's leaks. He also stressed that President Barack Obama was clear that his response to the leaks should not have "a chilling effect on the press". Asked if he shared the UK security services' concerns about the threat to national security from the leaks, he said he wanted to focus on the "importance of having this debate about what the trade-offs are between security and privacy, between transparency and secrecy, and to do so in a way that protects whistleblowers – which is different, by the way, from wholesale releasing of information, hundreds of thousands of documents". Barzun said Obama had "promised to seek to balance the legitimate security concerns of not only our citizens but of our allies, and balance those with the privacy concerns shared by all people". He said the president "put in specific measures to protect whistleblowers if they see something illegal or unethical. That's an important part of the balance". • Harold Evans, the former editor of the Sunday Times and the Times, has come to the defence of the Guardian for its reporting of the Snowden leaks. "No editor in his right mind wants to give aid to murderous enemies," he writes, "but every editor is duty bound to scrutinise the use of power, responsibly but fearlessly, however personally unappealing a leaker may be. Conflict between the conceptions of duty is inevitable, indeed healthy. Reporting often exposes an ill that government has not recognised or acknowledged." • Mexico has criticised the United States over new allegations of spying after a German magazine reported that the US National Security Agency (NSA) had hacked Felipe Calderon's public email account while he was president. Der Spiegel said in May 2010, an NSA division known as "Tailored Access Operations" reported it had gained access to then-president Calderon's email account, and turned his office into a "lucrative" source of information. It said details of the alleged NSA hacking of Calderon's account were contained in a document leaked by former NSA contractor Edward Snowden. Snowden's leaked information has prompted angry recriminations against Washington in Latin America, particularly Brazil. You can read last week’s live blog here. We'll have full coverage of all the fallout from the revelations here throughout the week. Updated at 9.43am BST