Jack Straw was first elected in 1979 and has stood in his constituency of Blackburn in eight general elections. Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian The former Labour cabinet minister Jack Straw is to stand down as an MP at the next election. Straw, who was foreign secretary in the run-up to the Iraq war and a member of the cabinet throughout the 1997-2010 Labour government, announced his decision at a meeting of his Blackburn constituency Labour party on Friday evening. Straw, who will be nearly 69 at the next election, has been MP for Blackburn since 1979 and has fought eight general elections there. He told the Guardian he had to acknowledge that, if he stood again, he would have to count on continuing good health for the next seven years. He did not want to represent a constituency such as Blackburn at anything other than full tilt, and it might have tempted providence to stand again in 2015. Straw served as home secretary, foreign secretary, leader of the house and justice secretary under Tony Blair and Gordon Brown. He has been an active backbencher since Labour's defeat and has recently been sharply critical of the Guardian for publishing the US spying leaks of the former NSA contractor Edward Snowden. Although he was more cautious about the invasion of Iraq than Blair, and formed successful personal alliances with US secretaries of state Colin Powell and Condoleezza Rice, he has never pretended he went as far as telling Blair not to go ahead with the invasion. In his revealing autobiography, Last Man Standing, he describes the decision as "the most difficult and momentous I've ever made". He still defends it "on the basis of the information that was available at the time". Straw was probably the leading advocate of MPs being given a vote before the war, a legacy that stuck when David Cameron recalled the Commons for a vote on military action over President Bashar al-Assad's use of chemical weapons in Syria. He will also be remembered for introducing the Human Rights Act, setting up the Macpherson inquiry into police racism, and being one of the many cabinet ministers who tried and failed to reform the Lords. It is likely he will be offered a peerage. He is also, by his own account, a survivor and administrator as much as a visionary. Explaining his decision to stand down, Straw said: "My love affair with this town [Blackburn] is not going to end on 7 May 2015, nor is my connection with it. But there were three issues I had to face. "First, that I couldn't go on forever as the town's MP. "Second, that whether I stood down in 2015, or in 2020, or whenever, it would be a terrible wrench. "Third, that whilst I am as certain as anyone can be that I'd have the energy to continue at the pace necessary for three or four years, I couldn't guarantee that I could keep going at that pace right into my mid-70s. To take that risk would be profoundly unfair on the electors of Blackburn, on this party, and on Alice [Perkins, his wife] and my family. "Luck does play a significant part in anyone's fortunes, and, as I have said, I have been very lucky. So, to put this another way, I did not want to push my luck, to tempt providence." On Friday He praised the Labour leader,: "As recent weeks have brought home to the public, in Ed Miliband we have a leader who has the ability, the determination, and the character to take this country to a better, and much fairer place than under this government". He said Miliband had changed the political weather with his conference speech, but warned the party against complacency. "Gaining support at the ballot box is not fundamentally about transactions, but trust; about managing to persuade voters that their values and ours, their hopes and ours, are the same."