Protesters march through downtown Washington DC during the Stop Watching Us Rally. Photograph: Allison Shelley/Getty Images When Edward Snowden leaked documents revealing widespread National Security Agency surveillance of phone and digital communication in June, he also thrust Rebecca MacKinnon's Ranking Digital Rights project into overdrive. The project aims to rank the world's internet and telecommunications companies on how well they respect users' rights of privacy and free expression. MacKinnon is working to determine the baseline standards of corporate policy and practice and to educate internet users, advocacy groups, policymakers and companies on the current state of affairs. "The Snowden leaks have drawn public attention to how government surveillance systems leverage commercial internet and telecommunications platforms – all over the world – in a way that no other investigative reporting, activism, or other whistle blowing had succeeded in doing previously," MacKinnon, author of Consent of the Network, said in an email. "A lot of research institutions, foundations and their boards are now waking up and saying: 'We need to understand this better. We need to figure out what can be done about this and try to support or be part of some solutions.'" The project is still in its early stages. MacKinnon is putting together case studies around the world to develop her assessment criteria, beginning with research on internet companies in India, Russia and China in July. The project is now examining Deutsche Telekom's operations in its home country of Germany, its subsidiary T-Mobile Hungary, Spain's Telefonica, and India's Bharti Airtel and BSN. A US study is also "getting off the ground", according to MacKinnon's website. She expects to finish final drafts of the case studies by December, then finalize the ranking criteria and release grades next year. A mixed bag of policies and reactions MacKinnon says she already has been surprised by the wide range of policies she's finding within the industry – and, in some cases, even within individual enterprises. Company reactions to her research have been similarly mixed: some have been enthusiastic. Others have been hostile or indifferent. The project's website argues that if companies talk with the Ranking Digital Rights project while it's still drafting its criteria, the final ranking system "is more likely to take their concerns and perspectives on board". In order to keep her research free of potential biases, MacKinnon – a former CNN correspondent and bureau chief – isn't taking any industry funding. Snowden's leaks have made it easier for her to get meetings with potential funders, she said. So far, her work has garnered support from the MacArthur Foundation and billionaire George Soros' The Open Society Forum, along with the University of Pennsylvania, where MacKinnon's co-teaches a class on this issue. The project isn't yet fully funded for next year, however, and MacKinnon is well aware that she's undertaken a huge task. One of the project's biggest challenges will be to narrow the scope of research to a manageable – but still meaningful – field of study. As MacKinnon notes on her website: "That means we won't be able to include everything on everybody's laundry list of what an ideal company ought to be doing on all fronts; we will have to prioritize and focus on what is most urgent, important and measurable." A changing landscape While the Snowden revelations have brought new attention to the issue of privacy, it's hardly a new human rights issue. The United Nation's Universal Declaration of Human Rights and International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights both recognize privacy as a human right. For average citizens – even those who can't be bothered to read the terms of service agreements that come with software they download – the stakes are high, given the massive amounts of digital information available about almost everyone. The issue also is of keen interest to socially responsible investors. (MacKinnon is scheduled to speak about this issue at the annual SRI conference in Colorado on Wednesday.) Many companies already have been responding to the public's growing interest in the issue. Google has issued transparency reports that detail requests from government officials to remove content, among other issues, for years. Twitter, Microsoft, Facebook and Yahoo also issue similar reports. Meanwhile, Facebook and LinkedIn are working with the Global Network Initiative, a multi-stakeholder group trying to craft a "collaborative approach to protecting freedom of expression and privacy". Companies who join the GNI agree to undergo an independent assessment to determine whether they have adequate policies in place to implement the group's principals. Still, there's plenty left to do. "There are definitely some companies that are failing to make the grade," MacKinnon said. She declined to name names. "These are tricky issues. There are some things that really depend on whether the law is reasonable." Jonathan Berr is a freelance writer in New Jersey. He has covered a wide variety of beats, ranging from to electric utilities to media conglomerates to tech companies