Steve Coogan, above, thinks agnostics are cowards. Photograph: Mark Large/Rex Features I was interested to read Shirley Williams' concerns about the "mass surveillance practised by GCHQ" (Letters, 28 October). When my American colleague Mark Hosenball sought to bring the existence of this agency to the public's attention in a 1976 Time Out article, he was deported from the UK on grounds of publishing "information harmful to the security of the UK" and "prejudicial to the safety of the servants of the crown". The government then in power was Labour, in whose cabinet served … Shirley Williams. Mandy Merck London • If I were Angela Merkel, I would be offering permanent political asylum to Edward Snowden: and possibly a German government job for life. They do say revenge is a dish best served cold. Charlie Marks Cork, Ireland • Theresa May seems to have missed the point (May admits 'go home' vans were a failure, 23 October). Surely these mobile posters were not targeted at illegal immigrants; the prime audience for which they were intended was those disaffected Tories contemplating a move to Ukip. Their success, or otherwise, will be apparent come the next general election. David Collins Kidderminster, Worcestershire • I am delighted to see that Sunder Katwala has joined the campaign to get St George's Day accepted as the English national holiday (Response, 28 October). It largely already is on the street; it is just British establishment/elite obstruction that needs to be overcome. Robin Tilbrook Chairman, The English Democrats • Steve Coogan thinks "agnosticism is for cowards" (Knowing me? No way, Weekend, 26 October). Religion and atheism both depend on unprovable belief. Believers stand firmly on the rocks of their own certainties. We agnostics are cast adrift in a sea of unknowability. It takes courage to face up to that. Andrew Haig Brighton • If Grant Shapps has a problem with the BBC's journalism (Editorial, 28 October) he should write to Points of View like everyone else. Jonathon Palmer London