At some time on Wednesday in a palace room well away from public gaze, and with no press there to report on it, the Queen may be presented with a royal charter overseeing the regulation of newspapers. Few people understand what a royal charter is or could explain why one is needed in order to regulate journalists in this country. Apart from the Queen's staff the only people apparently in attendance will be members of the privy council, essentially a subcommittee of the cabinet. The idea of using a medieval instrument to recognise regulation of newspapers was the idea of Oliver Letwin, the famously clever minister at the Cabinet Office. Its intent was to avoid more direct statutory underpinning of regulation but, in reality, it merely channelled things through the back door of Buckingham Palace rather than the front door of Westminster. The use of this obscure device has done enormous damage to the process of finding a better system of press regulation. Because the privy council's role in such matters is effectively no more or less than that of the government of the day, it has introduced an element of political influence – no matter how distant – into the control of the press. The proposal that it should require a two-thirds majority in parliament to amend the charter was intended as reassurance; it has failed in that. The beguiling idea of a charter – and it was initially welcomed by some of the newspapers which have since turned against it – has gone horribly sour. Nonetheless, by Wednesday evening we may well have one. There are two possible paths ahead. The first is war – a game of chicken between press and politicians. The press will set up its own regulator, launch legal challenges and defy parliament to act. It might work, or it might (pre- or post-election) end up with parliament triggering something worse, such as regulation by Ofcom. The second path is an attempt at peace. After all, Lord Justice Leveson was only brought in because of serious allegations, some of which come to criminal trial this week. The press could do more to meet the spirit of his report by creating something largely compliant with the judge's (mostly acceptable) recommendations for what a regulator should look like. That might involve something that has yet to happen – all parties sitting down in the same room and comparing notes. The differences may not be as great as some extreme rhetoric on both sides suggests. The Guardian, almost uniquely, has been talking to everyone throughout. We continue to meet with all three main political parties, and to have a dialogue with all newspaper groups, just as we do with Hacked Off, the pressure group representing many victims of press intrusion. We don't like charters and consider the press's own alternatives for both setting up and recognising regulation insufficiently independent. We, along with the FT and the Independent, would prefer our colleagues in the press to agree to a more robustly independent regulator. Others would like us to create a rival regulator. But we are unpersuaded that having a broadsheet-only auditor solves anything. The present standoff leaves the politicians with a headache. They have secured a royal seal – but failed to clinch a deal. The real problem politicians have is that few journalists trust their commitment to press freedom in practice. The recent behaviour of MPs over the revelations by Edward Snowden about the NSA's mass surveillance has not helped Westminster's cause. The cabinet secretary, acting on behalf of David Cameron, decreed there had been enough debate before Downing Street warned that it would use the courts to prevent further reporting. Legislation has been misused to try to redefine journalistic activities as acts of terror. And the prime minister has encouraged a select committee to investigate the Guardian's reporting and issued yet more veiled threats on Monday. In America, a country with a written constitution and a clearer idea of the separation of powers, none of these things has happened. Imagine President Obama menacing the New York Times or Washington Post. The US Congress is having a bigger and more important debate: about the NSA and the nature of oversight. Around the world there is dismay and mystification at what has been happening to the press in Britain. How did the phone-hacking scandal continue for so long without scrutiny? Why is there no public interest defence available to journalists, whether tabloid or broadsheet, across the law? Why is the British press – often good on civil liberties – collectively arguing that journalists have no right to question the activities or words of intelligence agencies – a doctrine that is an anathema to editors elsewhere in the world? And how on earth is the country that did so much to create the idea of a free press on the verge of using a medieval instrument to help regulate it? The investigative record of the Guardian speaks for itself. We are against excessive journalistic intrusion on individual privacy, just as we are against suspicionless state intrusion. Our own investigation was ill-served by a fig-leaf system of "regulation" that was readier to condemn the Guardian than the News of the World. We hope for a better, more independent form of regulation in future. In that, we are in line with the overwhelming majority of public opinion as well as parliament. But the charter is just messy. It is time for politicians, press and the victims of intrusion to sit down to find a compromise.