Andrew Parker, head of MI5. Photograph: MI5/PA • So in the next stage of his pique-driven war on journalism, Andrew "Nosy" Parker, head of MI5, will tell MPs on the House of Commons' intelligence and security committee that many of the terrorists he had under surveillance have gone to ground – a direct result of the Guardian's reporting of information from the whistleblower Edward Snowden. And the likelihood is that many MPs will nod in agreement and that those media organisations that have spent so many months proclaiming their independence from government will uncritically and unquestioningly report everything he tells them. Yesterday the Sun trailed his likely approach in grotesque finger-pointing fashion – alongside a photo of the World Trade Centre towers ablaze on 9/11. For, jealously, they guard their right to take dictation whenever Nosy or his people feel inclined to give it. • Nosy's war on journalism throws up unlikely stars, and one of them is Julian Smith, the hitherto little-known Tory MP for Skipton and Ripon. He initiated a Commons debate last week on our Snowden stories and has reported our alleged transgressions to the police. Yesterday, three days after we revealed that he placed a picture of himself on his official website posing with staff, clearly identifiable, from Menwith Hill, the high-security US base in North Yorkshire, he was to be found re-tweeting the fruits of the latest MI5 dictation, as reprinted in the Sun. Smith, who also wrongly accused the Guardian of distributing information about British intelligence agents, takes issue with much of our reporting, presumably on the basis that secrets should stay secret. "Why did they publish details of internal communications showing the gay and lesbian clubs that GCHQ staff belong to?" he complained last week. And indeed, one piece published here in August did say: "A member of Stonewall since last year, GCHQ has its own Pride group for staff who are lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender." But then the MI5 website itself says, "We work with Stonewall and have an active Lesbian Gay Bisexual and Transgender (LGBT) staff network, which supports staff and provides advice for colleagues." It even compounds the breach, by carrying the Stonewall logo more prominently than anything else on that webpage. Maybe the honourable member and his media friends should have Nosy and Co arrested. • While MI5, ministers and the transcription press work hard to close down any further disclosures about the extent of official snooping, it's good to know that the politicians haven't lost their sense of humour. It was said that irony died the day Henry Kissinger was awarded the Nobel Peace prize after masterminding the carpet-bombing and napalming of Cambodia and Laos, but it lives on here and will rear its head this week. On Thursday and Friday, the coalition hosts an international jamboree on open government. • What, meanwhile, is the greatest current challenge for a PR professional? Once it was keeping the BBC out of trouble, but that is now an impossible task. Burnishing the image of the then deputy prime minister, John Prescott, was always somewhere top of the list. Now it is selling current deputy prime minister Nick Clegg to the voters. He's had a wretched press – too often seen as the class swot, the betrayer of Liberal tradition and not, of course, helped by his coalition partners dumping on him in endless off-the-record briefings to friendly scribblers. Could it be that, faced with this sad reality, deputy PM Clegg is about to buy himself the best PR professional he can find as his spin doctor-in-chief, ready to rescue that image in the style of Red Adair, in time for the election in 2015? It's a dirty job, but someone has to do it. For the right price, someone always will. • Finally, a time of loss. The rock world mourns the loss of Lou Reed. At the same time, Jeremy Hunt's health department mourns the decision to immediately seek to capitalise on his death with an ill-judged tweet on the NHS Choices website. "Lou Reed among just 14% of liver transplant patients not to survive 1 yr. He was unlucky but life took its toll," it said. As for the tweeter, whose handiwork was quickly disappeared on being given wider circulation and causing some disquiet, they mourn the loss of a promising career. Twitter: @hugh_muir