Top eight stories on MediaGuardian Newspapers seek injunction over royal charter Industry says government rejection of its rival plan for a new press regulator is 'wholly unfair, irrational and unlawful' David Cameron makes veiled threat to media Prime minister alludes to courts and D notices and singles out the Guardian over coverage of Edward Snowden saga Former BBC driver found dead David Smith had been accused of abusing a 12-year-old boy after investigation prompted by Jimmy Savile case Graham Norton: BBC payoffs 'defy belief' Chatshow host criticises 'sacks of cash' paid to departing executives at a time many in BBC were having to tighten belts Jurors told phone-hacking trial may take six months Former News International chief executive Rebekah Brooks and David Cameron's former spin doctor Andy Coulson are among the eight defendants, who all pleaded not guilty BBC criticised over climate change sceptics A letter from the BBC in response to the science committee's criticism defends airing 'misinformed' arguments Liberty Global sells international content arm to Breaking Bad network AMC Networks buys ChelloMedia for $1bn in deal that includes its joint partnerships with A+E Networks, which runs CBS Mojo at 20: the editor's top covers – in pictures Editor-in-chief, Phil Alexander, picks his favourite 20 covers of the music magazine from the past 20 years Top comment on MediaGuardian The decline of print doesn't mean the end of journalism Mary Kissel: Traditional journalists now have to contend with a host of web-based rivals – but the competition will do them good Today's headlines The Guardian Rebekah Brooks and Andy Coulson trial begins. P4 Graham Norton attacks BBC over payoffs. P5 Former BBC driver found dead. P5 BBC criticised over airtime for climate change sceptics. P9 Newspapers seek injunction over royal charter plan. P11 Diane Keaton plans US TV version of Last Tango in Halifax. P13 David Cameron makes veiled threats to media over NSA and GCHQ leaks. P18 Apple's new iPhones sell at record pace. P23 AMC buys 68 TV channels from Liberty Media. P28 Daily Telegraph Rebekah Brooks and Andy Coulson trial begins. P10 Graham Norton attacks BBC over payoffs. P11 Women are too often 'obliging gigglers' in a man's media world, says Radio 4's Jane Garvey. P11 Obituary: TV and film director Antonia Bird. P27 Liberty Media sells Chellomedia to AMC. Business P1,5 Sky entertainment channels to be available on Now TV internet box. Business P5 Financial Times Rebekah Brooks and Andy Coulson hire big legal guns for trial. P2 How Twitter helped people deal with the UK storm. P3 Misha Glenny: Leaks have weakened American control of the web. P13 Radio tries to stay on track amid lurking tech groups. P19AMC sets sights on viewers in Europe. P20 Vivendi takes full control of Canal Plus. P21 Samsung talks apps with Silicon Valley. P21 The Times Welsh TV hopes to make a killing with subtitled murder mystery. P3 Joan Collins lobbied Downton Abbey makers for a role on the show. P11 How Poirot introduced up-and-coming acting talent. P13 Graham Norton says BBC payoffs 'defy belief'. P13 High court move to halt approval of press regulation charter. P16 Rebekah Brooks and Andy Coulson trial begins. P20 iPhone sales keep Apple's investors happy. P37 Obituary: John Holmstrom, popular announcer in the heyday of BBC Radio 3. P50 The Independent Rebekah Brooks and Andy Coulson trial begins. P6 Newspapers seek injunction on press regulation royal charter. P6 Leader: In publishing the royal charter on press regulation, we do not necessarily endorse it. P14 The story of the storm in tweets. P34 Danny Boyle is among those revitalising the comedy cop show. P43 Special supplement: final draft of press regulation charter i Graham Norton criticises the BBC for giant payoffs. P2 Rebekah Brooks and Andy Coulson trial begins. P5 Danny Boyle and others are revitalising comedy cop shows. P37 New groups are considering pooling regional titles into a new business. P42 Wall Street Journal Europe Vivendi to buy remainder of TV company Canal Plus. P15 Shares in internet companies are soaring again. P15 Google recasts EU settlement proposal. P17 Amazon may eventually become known for selling groceries. P28 Daily Mail Anger at Gary Lineker's tasteless storm tweet. P7 Lady Gaga's X Factor routine prompts hundreds of complaints. P9 Iain Duncan Smith blasts BBC for 'bedroom tax' bias/ P19 Rebekah Brooks and Andy Coulson jury told trial could last six months. P25 David Cameron threatens Guardian with legal action over spy leaks. P24 Graham Norton attacks BBC over payoffs. P27 Newspapers launch legal challenge to MPs' royal charter plan. P28 Daily Express Rebekah Brooks and Andy Coulson trial begins. P5 Graham Norton hits out at BBC over payoffs to former bosses. P7, P18 Ancestor of Benedict Cumberbatch was involved in a real murder mystery. P8 How Dancing On Ice keeps Jayne Torvill in shape. P31 The Sun Former BBC driver found dead. P1,6 David Cameron warns Guardian over spy leaks. P2 Rebekah Brooks and Andy Coulson trial begins. P6 Hundreds of complaints to ITV and Ofcom over Lady Gaga's X Factor routine. P7 Ally Ross: X Factor is pants. P11 Graham Norton blasts BBC over payoffs. TV Biz P1 EastEnders coverage. TV Biz P1 X Factor coverage. TV Biz P1 Strictly Come Dancing coverage. TV Biz P2-3 Daily Mirror Graham Norton says BBC payoffs 'defied belief'. P3 BBC driver in Jimmy Savile probe found dead. P11 Rebekah Brooks and Andy Coulson trial begins. P20 Daily Star Rebekah Brooks and Andy Coulson trial begins. P2 The X Factor coverage. P9 BBC stars savage bosses over huge payouts. P16 Go to MediaGuardian