A Spanish citizen protests alleged surveillance by the US National Security Agency. Photograph: Vallejo/ vallejo/Demotix/Corbis Spain's public prosecutor's office announced on Tuesday that it had launched a preliminary inquiry into the alleged widespread surveillance of Spanish citizens' private phone calls and emails by the US National Security Agency, to determine whether it could be prosecuted under Spanish law. It was reported on Monday that the NSA had monitored 60.5m Spanish phone calls in the space of one month alone, in the latest revelations from the documents leaked by the US whistleblower Edward Snowden. The attorney general, Eduardo Torres-Dulce, issued a statement saying that, having seen the media reports "about a possible interception and irregular access to telephonic and/or electronic metadata ... by foreign official services" it would determine the exact nature of any potential crime and whether this could be punished under Spanish law. The outcry comes days after it emerged that the NSA spied on the phone calls of scores of allies, including the personal phone of the German chancellor, Angela Merkel. On Monday, the Spanish foreign minister warned the US that, if the monitoring of tens of millions of phone calls was confirmed, it could "lead to a breakdown in the traditional trust" between the two countries. José Manuel García Margallo said that the NSA's alleged activities could have broken Spain's privacy laws, which prohibit the collecting of data in relation to electronic communications. Madrid had earlier on Monday summoned the US ambassador to Spain, James Costos, to meet with government officials and explain the extent of US surveillance. García Margallo on Tuesday nonetheless stressed the importance of relations between Spain and the US, and said it would not hold up negotiations over a European free-trade agreement. "We work very closely with USA on security, we have some common topics where our positions are the same," he told a news conference on an official visit to Lithuania. Many in Spain feel that the government has not done enough to protect its own interests and had previously shown a surprisingly relaxed attitude to US spying when the allegations first began to emerge in the press last week. Human rights groups have called on the government, led by Mariano Rajoy of the rightwing People's party, to do more to protect its citizens.