Top eight stories on MediaGuardian Newspapers granted final attempt at blocking royal charter approval Industry granted emergency high court hearing just hours before press regulation charter due before privy council Phone-hacking trial jury warned of prejudice risk British justice also on trial, says judge as he tells jurors to ignore comments they may come across in all media Sunday People site to relaunch on 5 November Paper to get its own website for the first time, which will focus on specially-created content such as videos and listicles David Cameron urged not to water down freedom of information act 76 organisations sign letter to prime minister The Sky at Night gets new slot on BBC4 The astronomy show – first broadcast in 1957 – will run an expanded 30-minute programme in its new monthly home David Cameron makes veiled threat to media Prime minister alludes to courts and D notices and singles out the Guardian over coverage of Edward Snowden saga Lady Gaga's The X Factor routine sparks hundreds of complaints ITV stand by singer after 260 complaints received about explicit nature of pre-watershed performance Sky rolls out £4.99 Now TV entertainment package Ten channels including Sky Atlantic, with shows such as Game of Thrones and Mad Men, offered for £4.99 a month without subscription Top comment on MediaGuardian Not just another BBC jibe Jackie Ashley: With his cynical attack on the BBC, Grant Shapps has given us a nasty taste of how politicians could exercise power over the press Today's headlines The Guardian Phone-hacking trial jury told to ignore blogs and Private Eye. P4 Sky at Night to move to BBC4. P5 Newspapers in last-ditch court bid to halt royal charter. P11 Blockbuster on brink of collapse in UK for second time this year. P11 Lady Gaga routine on on The X Factor draws hundreds of complaints. P13 Child abuse case closed after former BBC driver is found dead. P15 Messaging apps take bite out of BlackBerry. P26 Thomson Reuters to cut 3,000 more jobs. p27 Jackie Ashley: Grant Shapps's attack on teh BBC is a dangerous and sinister move. P30 Daily Telegraph Government refuses to disclose names of ministers who will take final steps on press royal charter. P1,5 Police criticised after targeting newsagent near phone-hacking trial. P5 BBC finds new space for The Sky at Night. P12 BBC faces questions after death of former driver. P15 Gillian Reynolds on a week in radio. P32 Samsung bites into Apple. Business P4 Financial Times Phone-hacking trial jury told to ignore publicity. P4 Google Plus plans Android addition. P17 Blockbuster on brink of collapse in UK for second time this year. P17 Thomson Reuters to cut 3,000 jobs this year. P18 Facebook mimics Twitter to add appeal. P20 Analysis: Is Apple innovating enough? P21 The Times Great British Bake Off whips up fresh interest in the WI. P5 The Sky at Night to move to new slot on BBC4. P8 Phone-hacking trial judge says 'justice is on trial'. P11 Operation Yewtree police make two more arrests. P26 Celebrity chefs given a dressing down for not choosing the most sustainable fish. P27 Blockbuster put into administration for the second time. P43 The Independent Judge opens phone-hacking trial with contempt warnings. P1, P7 Apple iPad Air review. P9 Former BBC driver was a prolific paedophile. P10 Matthew Norman: the ritual pantomime of politicians bashing the BBC. P17 Newspapers launch final attempt to stop royal charter. P21 David Suchet almost quit Poirot over handkerchief. P26 Steve Coogan interview. P46 Obituary: TV director Antonia Bird. P50 Is Apple doing enough to hold off its rivals? P54 2,000 jobs at risk in new Blockbuster collapse. P56 i The nation's longest-running TV shows. P2 Jury warned against contempt of court as phone-hacking trial begins. P5 Former BBC driver had 22 abuse convictions. P6 Life In Brief: televison director Antonia Bird. P12 Matthew Norman: The pre-election pantomime of bashing the BBC. P13 David Suchet almost quit Poirot role due to handkerchief argument. P23 Interview with Steve Coogan. P36 The 30 Second Briefing: Snapchat. P40 Wall Street Journal Europe Nokia posts loss, but Lumia sales jump. P15 Blackberry approached Facebook about a bid. P15 Google prepares Smartwatch. P16 Daily Mail Chief executive of TalkTalk says the web lacks any morals. P5 Nat Rothschild loses bid to overturn Daily Mail's libel victory. P8 Cambridge Union president says ITV rejected her for live debate due to her sex. P9 Judge warns jury that phone-hacking case will put 'British justice on trial'. P11 Former BBC driver had 22 abuse convictions. P21 Ripper Street fans complain of 'meaningless mumbling' by the actors. P21 WI enjoys a Great British Bake Off boom. P33 Twitter aims to fend off a float disaster. P72 Daily Express David Suchet nearly quit as Poirot over handkerchief. P3 Judge tells phone-hacking jury that this is also British justice on trial. P4 350 women queue to join WI following Great British Bake Off success. P19 Former BBC driver was a serial paedophile. P19 Interview with former Blue Peter presenter Valerie Singleton. P29 Blockbuster set to go into administration again. P50 The Sun Two more arrested under Operation Yewtree. P4 Phone-hacking trial: 'Justice is on trial'. P6 The X Factor coverage. P14-15 The X Factor coverage. TV Biz P1 Coronation Street coverage. P2-3 Daily Mirror Jury in phone-hacking trial told to ignore Private Eye cover. P2 Newspapers launch last-ditch battle to block royal charter. P2 Next series of The Apprentice moved to autumn 2014 to avoid World Cup clash. P8 Hundreds flock to the Women's Institute thanks to Great British Bake Off. P9 Raymond Blanc apologises for Bake Off Twitter rant. P9 Filming of The Fall in chaos due to Jamie Dornan's Fifty Shades role. P13 Former BBC chauffeur had 22 convictions. P!5 Video rental giant Blockbuster back in administration. P29 Daily Star Phone-hacking trial jury sworn in. P4 Former BBCdriver had 22 convictions for sex abuse. P7 ITV ditches Xmas All Star Mr and Mrs special as it featured Jimmy Tarbuck. P7 Plaque praising Jimmy Savile removed from war memorial. P7 Go to MediaGuardian