12.04pm GMT Guardian editor Alan Rusbridger has defended the "responsible" way paper has reported Snowden's disclosures in the face of veiled threats from the British government. On Monday David Cameron suggested his government would take action against the Guardian if it failed to heed security advice about how damaging Snowden's continuing disclosure were. The prime minister said:  The approach we have taken is to try to talk to the press and explain how damaging some of these things can be and that is why the Guardian did actually destroy some of the information and disks that they have. But they've now gone on and printed further material which is damaging. I don't want to have to use injunctions or D notices or the other tougher measures. I think it's much better to appeal to newspapers' sense of social responsibility. But if they don't demonstrate some social responsibility it would be very difficult for government to stand back and not to act. Writing in the New York Review of Books, Rusbridger argued that press scrutiny was vital at a time when oversight of the security establishment was so inadequate and out of touch. He wrote:  In the absence of newspapers to find, analyze, and explain this sort of thing, we have to rely on parliamentary and congressional oversight committees or secret, one-sided courts to do the job for us. In the US we are very much in the hands of Senator Dianne Feinstein and, in the UK, Malcolm Rifkind, a former defense secretary. Neither is, to put it mildly, a child of the digital age. I may be doing Feinstein and Rifkind a disservice, but I suspect they would have struggled to understand the documents [about private web encryption capacities] that Jeff [Larson, a Web developer and reporter at ProPublica] deciphered, with or without my drawing to help them. There are echoes, a hundred years later, of the Whitehall bureaucrats trying to get their heads around Marconi’s wireless signals. Snowden’s documents show that the NSA and GCHQ employ extremely talented engineers who are ever more inventive in trying to dream up ever more exotic ways of keeping tabs on countless millions of people. To question, still less write about, their methods invites the standard response that one is giving away the game to the enemy. The spooks insist they work within the law. They will patiently explain the difference between a haystack—which they must be allowed to store—and a needle, which they can search for only under controlled circumstances. No one is in any doubt that their work is essential. We need capable intelligence agencies. Liberal democracies do have determined and resourceful enemies. There is plainly a tension between the secrecy required in much intelligence work and the transparency that, in all else, democracy demands. Careful, responsible journalism is also necessary. The Guardian, The Washington Post, ProPublica, and The New York Times have gone to exceptional lengths to edit the Snowden material with caution. In private—but inevitably not in public—people familiar with the nature of the documents concede this ... The reason this overall issue matters is that, as technology develops, the police and intelligence agencies (and others) will always want more, and bigger, haystacks—and the ability to keep them longer. And the ability to create astonishingly powerful algorithms to find the needles. Rusbridger also ridiculed the British government's decision to force the Guardian to destroy laptops containing some of the leaked material. Government officials overseeing the destruction of the machines (with an electric drill and an angle grinder) realised the futility of the operation but failed to see the irony of the decision, he said:  The government men said they were “painfully aware” that other copies existed, but their instructions were to close down the Guardian operation in London by destroying the computers containing information from Snowden. At some level I suspect our interlocutors realized that the game had changed ... Thee government officials who lectured us appeared blissfully blind to the irony that the only organization that had provably lost control of the data was not a newspaper, but the NSA. One official rolled his eyes at the thought of 850,000 people having access to it. But one has to ask why, if this was of such overwhelming importance, it took the state’s best security people five weeks to arrive at The Guardian’s offices. And why—nearly three months later—no one from the official world has “made safe” the New York Times cache of documents obtained from The Guardian, never mind contacting Greenwald, Poitras, ProPublica, or The Guardian’s New York office. A more plausible answer is that the British intelligence services simply find it extremely difficult to deal with journalists. Which, in itself, is illustrative of the wider problem of balancing surveillance with civil liberties. How on earth do you reconcile something that must be secret with something that begs to be discussed?