10.02am GMT Hi all. As you know Andrew Sparrow is off all this week, but politics goes on without him, just about, so I'm afraid that for today you're stuck with me as we head for another bruising round of PMQs. Ed Miliband’s energy price freeze policy has dominated the last few sessions, to the seeming frustration of David Cameron, who thinks it’s Marxist and it impossible to enforce. With energy bosses coming under fire again yesterday for their high price rises at the energy select committee, it seems likely that the issue will rear its head again today, with Miliband, as ever, keen to force Cameron into the role of de facto spokesman for the big six. It’s possible the our own dear Guardian and its publication of leaks about US and UK surveillance from Edward Snowden might come up again too, with Cameron having seemingly hardened his position slightly on Monday. Also today Nick Clegg will hold a press conference rescheduled from Monday when a crane fell on the Cabinet Office in the St Jude’s storm; this will take place at 2pm, and I’ll be covering that too. Here’s today’s schedule: 9am: Boris Johnson, the mayor of London, addresses the World Islamic Economic Forum in London. 9.45am: The supreme court rules on back to work schemes. 10.30am: Influential Lib Dem David Laws gives evidence on the constitutional implications of coalition government to the Lords constitution committee. 10.30am: Newspaper publishers ask the high court for permission to mount a legal challenge to the government’s decision to reject their proposals for a press regulating royal charter (more here). Midday: Prime minister’s questions. 2pm: Nick Clegg’s press conference. 2.15pm: Michael Fallon, the Tory energy minister, gives evidence on energy subsidies to the Commons environmental audit committee. Before I start, maybe I'd better just clear the air a bit. Now, I know the last time I was on here I got Danny Alexander and Douglas Alexander mixed up – so I'm sorry, all right? But look … their surnames are both Alexander and their first names both begin with D. And they're both Scottish... It’s easily done. I got two Scottish guys called D Alexander mixed up... I mean, come on, give me a break ... I tell you what, though, I didn’t receive any complaints whatsoever from Danny and/or Douglas Alexander. They found the whole thing completely understandable. It's been happening to them since school. Anyway, if it happens again, I’m sure you’ll let me know. On a legal note, there are some extremely tight publishing restrictions around the News of the World phone-hacking trial, so if you mention the case and you find your comment has been deleted, that is probably why. Sorry about that.