The Guardian today announced that James Ball -- currently data editor at the Guardian and based in London -- will join the Guardian's US news operation as special projects editor. His official start date will be announced in the coming weeks. In his new role -- a freshly created post in the Guardian's US newsroom -- James will initiate investigative and explanatory journalism projects for Guardian US, and help create new editorial innovations that advance the Guardian's digital journalism in the US and across the globe. For the past five months, James has been a key member of the Guardian's NSA reporting team. He has analyzed and reported on the NSA and GCHQ documents provided by Edward Snowden. He has broken several stories, including the revelation that the NSA monitored the calls of 35 world leaders, as well as how the NSA and GCHQ have successfully cracked much online encryption, from the Guardian's US newsroom. James was appointed data editor in April 2013 and is one of the UK's leading data journalists. He joined the Guardian in February 2011, and has worked on a number of high-profile stories, including the Guantanamo Files, Reading the Riots - which picked up multiple awards - Offshore Secrets, and the campaign against the extradition of Richard O'Dwyer. Prior to joining the Guardian, Ball worked at the Bureau of Investigative Journalism, and was part of the team behind iraqwarlogs.com, which won the Amnesty International Digital Journalism award in 2011. He also worked with WikiLeaks, where he assisted in publishing US embassy cables and collaborated with UK media outlets to make the cables accessible to journalists. "James is a great journalist with rare skills. His knowledge and tenacity have been key to the Guardian's award-winning reporting of the NSA Files. We're delighted he will now formally join our team and help us develop new projects as we continue to grow," said Guardian US editor-in-chief Janine Gibson. "I've been proud to work with the US team on the NSA revelations over the last few months. I've seen first hand the impact Guardian journalism is having in the US and globally. I'm thrilled to join the US team to help expand their innovative and agenda-setting journalism," said Ball. A replacement for the data editor role in London will be announced in due course. -ends- Media Contact: Gennady Kolker, the Guardian e: gennady.kolker@theguardian.com t: 646-937-5878 m: 925-437-4522 About James Ball James Ball graduated from City University in London in 2008 and joined The Grocer followed by the Bureau of Investigative Journalism (TBIJ). There, he worked on Panorama, Al Jazeera and Dispatches, and was one of the key team behind iraqwarlogs.com, which won the Amnesty International digital journalism award in 2011. James joined the Guardian in February 2011 following a brief spell at WikiLeaks. At WikiLeaks he aided in the publishing of the US embassy cables, worked with UK media outlets and made the cables accessible to journalists. He was awarded the Laurence Stern fellowship at the Washington Post in 2012. James has been a visiting lecturer at City University, teaching on the interactive and investigative journalism courses, since 2009. James has two academic books published, "WikiLeaks: news in the networked era", and "The Infographic History of the World". About the Guardian US The Guardian US is a New York-based digital newsroom that covers American and international news for a global online audience. Guardian US merges the innovation and energy of a start-up with independent, groundbreaking, award-winning journalism and backing of the Guardian brand. About the Guardian Guardian News & Media (GNM) publishes theguardian.com, the third largest English-speaking newspaper website in the world (comScore, August 2013). Since launching its US and Australia digital editions in 2011 and 2013 respectively, traffic from outside of the UK now represents over two-thirds of the Guardian's total digital audience.