Huppert: one of three Julians involved in the debate. Now that the presidents of France, Brazil and the United States have all joined the chancellor of Germany and whistleblower Edward Snowden in seeking proper public debate on the data-mining reach of Anglo-American security services, British MPs moved on Thursday to play catch-up on accountability. Not very many MPs and not much catching up, but it was definitely progress. It was not a party political debate, not left versus right, spooks vs traitors, or even brains versus brawn, though critics of GCHQ and the NSA could probably muster more GCSEs and PhDs on Thursday than the muscular "Spying is what spies do" spooks lobby, several of whom have "interesting" CVs. But pinkos and red-blooded types alike were suddenly agreed that assorted bits of opaque legislation – the kind that license James Bond to data-mine – are in need of review and updating. That's progress, too. Nonetheless, a debate like this attracts conspiracy theorists from all sides, so Tory Julian Lewis and Labour's Michael Meacher were both present. Indeed, a suspiciously high number of those taking part – three – were called Julian, the sort of detail that gets GCHQ computers very excited. They were on different sides though, so there is probably no plot. Shame. What happened? Well, those MPs who felt that Snowden and the Guardian did a public service by revealing the scale of Prism and Tempora and their data-mining capacities wanted to know why parliament's intelligence and security committee (ISC) hadn't blown its own little whistle. Had ISC even known about such hi-tech innovations, asked Julian Huppert (Lib Dem), Tom Watson (Lab) and Tory (libertarian tendency) Dominic Raab, the cross-party trio who initiated the debate? Labour ISC trusty George Howarth implied that the ISC hadn't – indeed, had only examined the issue after the Guardian's exposé in June, which he deemed legitimate but "unwise". His chairman, Sir Malcolm Rifkind, was more magnificently pompous, as befits an ex-foreign secretary. He couldn't say either way because it was classified! The Julians laughed cruelly. No need to reform the ISC, we've done it already, said Sir Malc in an irony-free passage. The Huppertites had problems too. Whenever one of them asserted that the Snowden leaks had not undermined western security, one of the spook types asked: how could they be sure? And what crimes exactly had the GCHQ/NSA crowd actually committed, because such accusation upsets law-abiding souls in Cheltenham, asked Lib Dem Martin Horwood? He happens to be GCHQ's MP (Mum and Dad both worked there), and is therefore as much in favour of mining data as Dennis Skinner is coal. Answers were vague, but no more than when the question was flipped: how could the other side know the legality of what GCHQ gets up to? And why had the wicked Guardian not been charged? Much more to the point, asked the Greens' Caroline Lucas, wasn't the real leaker an NSA that allows 850,000 staff to download state secrets? As the debate in ancient Westminster Hall wound on and the libertarians (security must not undermine basic freedoms) proved the better-briefed side, the spook faction got a bit dirty, as is their patriotic duty. What about Richard Gott, the public school Trot who had to resign from the Guardian after being exposed for taking KGB hospitality? And surely Angela Merkel must be faking outrage about being hacked considering that then chancellor and leftie Willy Brandt's office was penetrated by communist spies in the 70s? The spooks stopped short of saying that goateed Dr Huppert bore a suspicious resemblance to Trotsky and demanding DNA tests. But Adam Holloway asked leftie David Winnick if he'd think Snowden a traitor if a British city was nuked by terrorists (duh?). And Julian Smith managed to suggest that Guardian revelations about Tor and the dark web would help arms dealers and paedophiles. Tor is so secret that it's all over the internet.