The director general of MI5, Andrew Parker, was criticised on Thursday by a Conservative MP and former Foreign Office lawyer for suggesting that the Guardian's reporting of the National Security Agency files has provided a gift to terrorists. Dominic Raab said the files leaked by the US whistleblower Edward Snowden had highlighted the reach of British and US intelligence agencies and had not disclosed interception techniques or sources. The criticisms of MI5 were voiced in a parliamentary debate on surveillance in which MPs were told that the secretary of the DA notice committee, the voluntary body which advises the press when revelations could threaten national security, has said that the Guardian reports have not posed a threat to anyone's life. Julian Huppert, the Liberal Democrat MP for Cambridge, who secured the debate with Raab, said: "The secretary who looks at the D notices has confirmed that he has seen nothing published in the Guardian that would present a risk to life." The DA notice system says it defines national security as circumstances when human life is at risk. On 9 September, on a visit to the Guardian, the DA notice secretary, Andrew Vallance, told a meeting that he had to date not seen anything the Guardian had published that put anyone's life at risk. Julian Smith, a Conservative MP, who recently wrote to the Metropolitan Police to call for a criminal investigation into the Guardian, accused the newspaper of potential treason. He told MPs: "The Guardian, which had every right to report on this issue, which has raised important topics of debate, which has done so in a digital and global way and an interesting way – with good journalism – has threatened the security of our country and which today stands guilty potentially of treasonous behaviour." Raab opened his speech by praising the work of MI5 and GCHQ, with whom he worked as a Foreign Office lawyer. But he took issue with Parker's claim that the disclosures about the work of GCHQ in the NSA files had helped terrorists and suggested that the authorities were invoking national security to "muzzle" embarrassing disclosures. The Tory MP said: "In his speech the MI5 director general lambasted the Guardian for handing terrorists a gift – a very potent word he used. Ministers have more recently claimed that the disclosures have put lives at risk. "I want to take that seriously because Mr Parker claimed that making public 'the reach and limits of GCHQ breaches national security'. Let us be very clear about what was being talked of here – not disclosing interception techniques, not the technical aspect, not the revelation of source or operatives – clearly a major cause of concern if that were to happen. Simply revealing our intelligence reach. I find this assertion difficult to take at face value. It may be true but it is not on the mere assertion." Raab questioned whether national security had been breached because terrorists knew their communications were routinely monitored. He said: "Any serious terrorist group assumes their phones, emails and internet use will be monitored. That is no secret. Learning that western spies drain the swamp of their own citizens' data in the process does not help terrorists in any tangible way. "If national security were materially breached why hasn't anyone at the Guardian been charged or even arrested since the search of their offices back in July? Why wasn't David Miranda, detained for several hours, arrested and then bailed following his detention at Heathrow in August? Either UK law enforcement is surprisingly slow, given these assertions that have been made, or national security is being used as a fig leaf to muzzle disclosures that are plain embarrassing." Huppert told MPs the Guardian had handled the NSA leaks in a "deeply responsible way". He said: "It is clear that the Guardian has been in touch with the security services, they have spoken to the D notice committee since 17 June and that is the assurance they have. The Guardian has been deeply responsible. What would be irresponsible would be if the Guardian had refused to have any role in this and allowed the information to be passed down by other people who may not have the same regard for our security and for our staff." Huppert disclosed the assessment of the DA notice secretary after Smith said the newspaper had put members of the intelligence agencies under "grave threat". Huppert told Smith, who recently published pictures of staff from RAF Menwith Hill on his website: "And of course the Guardian haven't published photos of anybody who works in this sort of area on their website without faces pixelated." Smith singled out a Guardian report on 4 October that the NSA has tried without success to develop attacks against users of Tor, a tool designed to protect online anonymity. "Many people feel in the police world [that report] is going to cause major issues of picking up those people engaged in organised crime," he said. The Tory MP accused the Guardian of having failed to discuss the documents with the government even though its editor-in-chief, Alan Rusbridger, held a meeting with the cabinet secretary, Sir Jeremy Heywood. This led the Guardian to agree to destroy hard drives after Heywood threatened to block further publication of details of the files using a high court injunction. Smith said: "I urge Mr Rusbridger today to begin an open dialogue with the government, to tell the government where these dumps of data are, to come clean on whether they can contain information that could lead to the identification of our security agents and I urge also Mr Rusbridger, his board, his editorial team to talk to the government before publishing and further report on our security services, on our intelligence gathering.". Martin Horwood, the Lib Dem MP for Cheltenham where GCHQ is based, voiced concerns about the dangers of exposing intelligence gathering. Horwood, whose parents worked at GCHQ and at Bletchley Park where his father helped to build the Colossus network, said: "If you do cast too much sunlight on some of these things they actually stop working. It is not so much about endangering the lives of agents as talking too much in public about the very precise techniques and sources actually makes those sources disappear and makes those techniques more difficult to apply. That endangers people in different ways. "I would love to think we have now entered some kind of safe postwar world where this level of secrecy is unnecessary. But that is simply not the case. We do still face some hostile states and some hostile state intelligence services." Sir Malcolm Rifkind, the former Tory foreign secretary who chairs parliament's security and intelligence committee, confirmed that his committee would be launching an inquiry to assess whether the oversight of the intelligence agencies has kept pace with developing technology. But he declined to say whether he knew about the Tempora programme, which gives GCHQ access to the network of cables carrying the world's phone calls and internet traffic, when the veteran Labour MP Michael Meacher asked him why he did not know about it. "[You] haven't got the faintest idea whether the committee was aware of programmes of any kind. When we are dealing with classified information, the whole point of the independent committee which has access to top secret information – whatever that information is – we don't announce it. "If [you] can devise a system whereby secret information can be made available to all law-abiding British citizens without being made available to the rest of the world simultaneously, then I'd be interested in hearing it. But I don't actually think he is likely to be able to meet that requirement." MPs heard that parliament's intelligence and security committee only investigated the PRISM programme after the Guardian revelations. The Guardian reported in June that the programme allows officials from the NSA to collect material including search history and the content of emails from Google, Facebook, Apple and other US internet firms. "It was after the Guardian revelations," George Howarth, a former Labour Home Office minister who is a member of parliament's intelligence and security committee, said when he was asked by his fellow Labour MP Tom Watson when the ISC started to investigate the PRISM programme. Howarth added: "It is not that we did not have any concerns or any interest in what GCHQ was capable of. That is an ongoing process, but inevitably, when something new emerges, it is appropriate that, as a committee, we look into it." Watson, one of the co-sponsors of the debate, told MPs: "An individual's data are just like his or her vote – almost insignificant by itself, privately expressed but massively powerful when aggregated. We should no more unnecessarily tamper with our citizens' data than we should impede their ability to vote. The capacity to deduce human behaviour and activity in the modern world of big data is impacting on our daily lives, from insurance premiums and health prevention through to online advertising and traffic management. Corporations are crunching data to learn about the way we live our lives."