Marty Natalegawa says Indonesia is deeply concerned and will not accept being spied on by Australia. Photograph: Lukas Coch/AAP Indonesian foreign minister Marty Natalegawa says it is "not cricket" for Australia to spy on the region at the behest of the United States, adding he has sought clarification from his Australian counterpart Julie Bishop on an important issue of "trust". Natalegawa spoke to reporters in Perth after discussions with Bishop that he characterised as frank and candid. "If Australia was itself subjected to such an activity do you consider it as being a friendly act or not? We are deeply concerned and it's something we cannot accept," he said. Natalegawa is in Perth for the annual Indian Ocean Rim Association for Regional Co-operation meeting. Friday's "please explain" with Bishop was sparked by media reports that Australia was using its regional diplomatic posts to carry out covert surveillance in Asia. Indonesia on Friday also called in the Australian ambassador in Jakarta, Greg Moriarty, for an explanation. "Trust is a process," Natalegawa said on Friday. "What we are simply seeking now is clarification and explanation. "This is not an Indonesia-focus situation. I'm told there are such facilities elsewhere. At least United States facilities," he said. "It's about trust, isn't it? Most countries will have technical capacities to intercept and carry out the activities that have been reported." A Fairfax report this week alleges intelligence collection has been carried out from Australian embassies in Jakarta, Bangkok, Hanoi, Beijing and Dili; and high commissions in Kuala Lumpur and Port Moresby, as well as other diplomatic posts, under an American-led program codenamed Stateroom. The Fairfax report drew on a leaked US National Security Agency document from whistleblower Edward Snowden, published by German publication Der Spiegel. Subsequent to the reports, the prime minister, Tony Abbott, declined to comment on any specifics regarding intelligence activities – but he insisted any activity carried out by Australian officials was within the law. "Well, the thing about every Australian governmental agency is that we all operate in accordance with the law," Abbott told reporters on Thursday. "Every Australian governmental agency, every Australian official, at home and abroad, operates in accordance with the law and that's the assurance that I can give people at home and abroad – our people operate in accordance with the law," he said. "Now, as for the precise workings of our intelligence organisations, it's been a long-standing practice not to comment on them." The Abbott government has invested considerable effort in soothing diplomatic relations with Jakarta, which were strained during the recent election because of the Coalition's policies regarding asylum seeker boats.