Countries are pushing the United Nations to take a greater role in future internet governance following revelations of mass surveillance by the US and UK. Photograph: Laurence Dutton/Getty Images There has been criticism of America's National Security Agency and Britain's GCHQ from Latin American nations, and close allies such as France and Germany, have expressed dismay. The European Union's internal market commissioner, Michel Barnier, has called for a "European data cloud", while its justice commissioner, Viviane Reding, has declared Monday's European parliament vote on new data protection rules to be "Europe's declaration of independence". These countries are pushing strongly for the UN to take a greater role in future internet governance, as India, Russia and China, have already done. Brazil's government has has published ambitious plansto promote its own networking technology, encourage regional internet traffic to be routed locally, and even set up a secure national email service. It is hosting a global summit in April on internet governance, following a call for "an environment in which all stakeholders, including all governments, participate on an equal footing". Brazil argues that it is simply protecting its citizens from an out-of-control US surveillance machine, while promoting the development of local internet businesses – a key 21st century industry. Germany's privacy commissioners have called for a review of whether Europe's internet traffic can be kept as far as possible within the EU (and by implication, from the UK). Are these proposals all steps towards a "Balkanised" set of isolated, national internets, as some fear? China's "great firewall" has long been criticised by freedom of expression campaigners. Iran's previous government planned a national "halal internet", although the new, reformist president has tweeted that he is working to ensure Iranians will "comfortably b able 2 access all info globally". The big difference between China and Brazil's plans is that Chinese citizens are deliberately cut off from debate on controversial political issues, while Brazilians will get new options to protect their privacy. US internet giants, such as Facebook and Google, are concerned at the increased costs and complexity of having to set up national data centres – and perhaps even separate regional subsidiaries, credibly insulated from demands for data from the US and its Five Eyes intelligence allies. But users would see little difference day-to-day. They might see warnings when information was about to be sent to servers vulnerable to the exercise of US legal powers – as some of the "made in Germany" email services that have sprung up over the summer are showing users when they are about to email people outside the country. The EU's data protection reforms look likely to mandate such warnings when personal data is sent to countries without equivalent privacy laws. However, without significant US legal reform, it is difficult to see what other options exist for countries that are not members of the Five Eyes surveillance club. Calls for the EU to cancel its "safe harbour" agreement, which allows companies to send Europeans' personal data across the Atlantic, are unlikely to succeed due to the potential economic damage. Greater US attention to its international legal obligations might go some way to reassuring other nations it is paying regard to their citizens' privacy. The UN's International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) – which the US ratified in 1992 – requires states to protect the human rights of everyone within their jurisdiction, which is clearly not the approach of the US's Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, given its much stronger protections for US people than foreigners. This and other NSA-related matters are sure to be raised when the US makes its regular appearance before the UN human rights committee in March to discuss compliance with the ICCPR. The committee will also have questions when the UK does the same next year. Germany has suggested that the UN Human Rights Council develop a new optional protocol for the ICCPR, which sets out states' obligations to protect privacy within the "national security" activities that have until now been a very grey area of international law. While this would be a positive long-term step, the negotiations could take years, and face significant opposition from the US and its allies – damaging the legitimacy of any protocol that was adopted by the UN general assembly without broad consensus. The UK has already blocked EU consideration of these issues, while GCHQ's director has refused an invitation to give evidence to the European parliament's inquiry. However, problems would remain even following the successful development of international law to better protect privacy. How could such rules be verified and enforced? Unlike nuclear tests, internet surveillance cannot be detected halfway around the world. Much stronger protections for whistleblowers might encourage future Edward Snowdens to reveal lawbreaking, but the Obama administration's crackdown on contact between officials and journalists exemplifies the likely response. States may have few other options than to follow Brazil's path. This would be expensive and likely to reduce the rapid rate of innovation that has driven the development of the internet to date. It would encourage authoritarian states to build more sophisticated national firewalls, and buy more of the communications surveillance equipment that has been developed to meet the US and its allies' apparently insatiable demands. But if states cannot trust that their citizens' personal data – as well as sensitive commercial and government information – will not be swept up in a gigantic global surveillance operation, this may be a price they are willing to pay. • Ian Brown is associate director of Oxford University's Cyber Security Centre, and senior research fellow at the Oxford Internet Institute @IanBrownOII