Guardian News & Media (GNM) has today announced the appointment of David Magliano to the newly created role of Managing Director for membership strategies. David, currently brand director at the Co-operative Group, will join GNM in the first quarter of 2014. He will bring extensive expertise of devising and delivering commercial and consumer propositions to drive loyalty and engagement amongst audiences. David will be responsible for formulating and launching new membership strategies which will look to bring the Guardian's groundbreaking open journalism to life for readers through digital and live experiences. The Guardian has already built on its long heritage as a print newspaper to embrace a transformative digital-first strategy which has seen theguardian.com become the third largest English-speaking newspaper website in the world*. Building on its digital success, GNM is now exploring new revenue streams, focused on membership and live experiences, which will allow readers to engage more closely with Guardian and Observer journalism and the Guardian brand. David will report directly to GNM's Chief Commercial Officer, David Pemsel. He will work closely with both GNM's senior editorial and commercial teams to formulate and deliver membership strategies, both in the UK and internationally, that will focus on new ways to enable our audiences to get involved with our award-winning content. David Pemsel, Chief Commercial Officer, GNM, said: "David is an extremely exciting hire, and we can't wait to have him on board. He brings vast knowledge and expertise in defining and delivering strategies that engage consumers more closely in brands and content, and his commercial leadership will be invaluable as we look to launch new revenue streams that widen and deepen our relationship with our audiences." David Magliano said: "I'm thrilled to be joining the most exciting and innovative brand in media. The Guardian's ground breaking open approach offers tremendous opportunities to bring its audiences ever closer to its award-winning journalism and content. I can't wait to get started." -ends- Notes to editors: * Global ComScore July 2013 Biographical details David is currently Director of Brand for The Co-operative Group. Previously David has been Director of Marketing of London's Olympic Bid and England's World Cup Bid; Sales and Marketing Director of two low cost airlines; and a director of two London advertising agencies. David is a non-executive director of Glasses Direct and a former non-executive director of Dyson. David was UK Marketer of the Year in 1999 and 2005, and Global CMO of the Year in 2006. He is a Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Marketing, and was awarded an MBE in 2006. For further information please contact: Guardian News & Media Press Office +44 20 3353 3696 media.enquiries@theguardian.com About Guardian News & Media Guardian News & Media (GNM) publishes theguardian.com, the third largest English-speaking newspaper website in the world (comScore, August 2013). Since launching its US and Australia digital editions in 2011 and 2013 respectively, traffic from outside of the UK now represents over two-thirds of the Guardian's total digital audience. In the UK, GNM publishes the Guardian newspaper six days a week and the world's oldest Sunday newspaper, The Observer. The newspapers were this year named the most trustworthy, accurate and reliable newspapers in the UK. The latest NRS PADD figures reveal that GNM's print and digital titles - the Guardian, The Observer and theguardian.com - remain the most-read quality newspaper combination in Britain for daily, weekly and monthly reach. The Guardian, which was first published in 1821, is most recently renowned for its trailblazing partnership with WikiLeaks in 2010, its globally acclaimed investigation into phone hacking and the launch of its groundbreaking digital-first strategy in 2011 and its agenda-setting NSA and GCHQ revelations following disclosures by whistleblower Edward Snowden.