9.46am GMT Welcome to our hub for all Edward Snowden, NSA and GCHQ-related developments around the world, as controversy over revelations leaked by the whistleblower continue to make headlines. As arguments rage over how much of our day to day life should be monitored in the name of security, we'll be tracking the growing global debate about privacy in the digital age. We'd like to know what you think about the whole NSA story, what you're worried about – and any new areas you'd like to read more about. Good morning. The White House has rejected a call from Edward Snowden for the US to abandon its “harmful” attempt to prosecute him under the Espionage Act.  White House adviser Dan Pfieffer said yesterday of the NSA whistleblower, currently in exile in Russia: “Mr Snowden violated US law. He should return to the US and face justice.” He said that no offers of clemency were being discussed. Meanwhile the head of the US Senate intelligence committee, Dianne Feinstein, said that if Snowden had truly been a whistleblower he would have reported his concerns about mass US surveillance to her committee privately. "That didn't happen, and now he's done this enormous disservice to our country. I think the answer is no clemency," she said. Feinstein last week stunned Washington when she came out against the NSA’s spying on allies, having previously staunchly supported the agency throughout the current controversy.  Mike Rogers, the chair of the House intelligence committee, called clemency for Snowden a “terrible idea”. He said: He needs to come back and own up. If he believes there's vulnerabilities in the systems he'd like to disclose, you don't do it by committing a crime that actually puts soldiers' lives at risk in places like Afghanistan. Rogers also said he was sceptical about White House and European claims to have been shocked by what Snowden revealed: I think there's going to be some best actor awards coming out of the White House this year and best supporting actor awards coming out of the European Union. Some notion that ... some people just didn't have an understanding about how we collect information to protect the United States to me is wrong. Former NSA and CIA director Mike Hayden said it was possible Barack Obama did not know about the tapping of Angela Merkel’s phone, but he said it was "impossible" that Obama's top staff members were unaware. "The fact that they didn't rush in to tell the president this was going on points out what I think is a fundamental fact: This wasn't exceptional. This is what we were expected to do." Also today: • Seventy of the world's leading human rights organisations have written to David Cameron to warn that the government's reaction to the mass surveillance revealed by Edward Snowden is leading to an erosion of fundamental rights and freedoms in the UK, report Matthew Taylor and Nick Hopkins. • Read their open letter here. • And yesterday, Ewen MacAskill and James Ball published this useful primer on what the NSA does and who it works with. Here’s an extract: The NSA operates in close co-operation with four other English-speaking countries - the UK, Canada, Australia and New Zealand - sharing raw intelligence, funding, technical systems and personnel. Their top level collective is known as the '5-Eyes'. Beyond that, the NSA has other coalitions, although intelligence-sharing is more restricted for the additional partners: the 9-Eyes, which adds Denmark, France, the Netherlands and Norway; the 14-Eyes, including Germany, Belgium, Italy, Spain and Sweden; and 41-Eyes, adding in others in the allied coalition in Afghanistan. The exclusivity of the various coalitions grates with some, such as Germany, which is using the present controversy to seek an upgrade. Germany has long protested at its exclusion, not just from the elite 5-Eyes but even from 9-Eyes. Minutes from the UK intelligence agency GCHQ note: "The NSA's relationship with the French was not as advanced as GCHQ's … the Germans were a little grumpy at not being invited to join the 9-Eyes group". Significantly, amid the German protestations of outrage over US eavesdropping on Merkel and other Germans, Berlin is using the controversy as leverage for an upgrade to 5-Eyes. Tonight at 6.45pm Tory MP David Davis, the Guardian’s Alan Rusbridger and Simon Jenkins, plus Wolfgang Büchner of Der Spiegel and Jo Glanville of writers’ group English PEN will be debating mass surveillance and the meaning of Snowden’s revelations for Britain at RIBA, 66 Portland Place, W1. I’ll be live-blogging it here, but if you want to attend email: surveillanceevent@gmail.com Updated at 9.48am GMT