The Economist has launched a new advertising campaign around the theme "Where do you stand?" Posters have begun to appear on London tube stations that pose three questions: Should Britain stay in or get out of the EU? Is fracking a good or bad solution to Britain's energy problems? Is electronic surveillance excessive or essential? Susan Clark, the magazine's chief marketing officer, said: “We want to bring these issues to the fore to encourage people to think and take a stance. "In true Economist style, the ads offer a balanced set of arguments that challenge existing viewpoints and stimulate debate." I'm not certain that the posters concerning surveillance, which centre on the NSA and GCHQ leaks by the whistleblower Edward Snowden, can be said to emulate "true Economist style." But they do, of course, have to grab travellers' fleeting attention. The one arguing that surveillance is excessive says: "Spies used to target likely wrongdoers. Now they hoover up information about everyone. American spooks collect information about nearly 100 billion communications each month. Britain expects much of the internet traffic that enters or leaves the country. Even innocent material may be stored for several days." And the one claiming that surveillance is essential says: "Since 2001 electronic snooping has helped disrupt at least 42 terrorist plots around the world. Computer networks have made it easier for bad guys to communicate in secret. Spies need new tools just to keep up. America's National Security Agency says its surveillance 'touches' no more than 16% of internet traffic." Where, on the basis of those two arguments, do you stand? Or do you think that's just a little too simplistic? If so, you might like to the click over to the blog report on last night's mass surveillance debate at RIBA. There you can read the thoughts of Tory MP David Davis, who accused the intelligence agencies of lying to parliament, and Guardian editor Alan Rusbridger, who said that papers, such as the Independent, Times and Daily Mail, which had criticised the Guardian for publishing, were actually saying: "Please don't send us any secrets, because we can't be trusted to have them." Read also the views of Wikipedia's Jimmy Wales, Google's Peter Barron, The Guardian's Simon Jenkins, Der Spiegel's Wolfgang Büchner plus Jo Glanville of English PEN and David Mepham of Human Rights Watch. And there was a feisty contribution by Lib-Dem MP Julian Huppert.