Australia's ambassador to Indonesia may be summoned to answer questions before a parliamentary commission amid growing anger in Jakarta about spying allegations. The deputy chairman of the Indonesian parliament's Commission I, which has responsibility for defence, foreign affairs and information, has also backed calls for a review of co-operation between Jakarta and Canberra on various policy fronts, including people smuggling and security. Agus Gumiwang said on Wednesday that Commission I would seek a briefing from Indonesia’s foreign minister, Marty Natalegawa, at which the possibility of summoning officials from the US and Australia would be discussed. "We will summon the foreign minister after recess, and also to discuss summoning US and Australia ambassadors to Commission I," Agus said on Wednesday. It's unlikely that Australia's ambassador to Indonesia, Greg Moriarty, could be compelled to appear before Commission I. The Indonesian parliament is scheduled to return on November 17. The comments from Agus come after Natalegawa on Monday labelled Australia's response to complaints that its embassy was used to collect data and eavesdrop on Indonesian interests as unacceptable. Moriarty was summoned to the Indonesian foreign ministry last Friday over the issue while the Australian foreign minister, Julie Bishop, discussed the matter with Natalegawa in Perth on the same day. The US embassy’s chargé d'affaires was also summoned in protest over reports that the Americans had conducted electronic surveillance and phone tapping from their Jakarta embassy. Bishop is set to face further questions when she attends the Bali Democracy Forum over the coming days. The spying row started off between the US and its European allies but last week Fairfax Media used documents leaked to the German news magazine Der Spiegel by the NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden to show that Australia was gathering intelligence from listening posts across the Asia-Pacific region. Guardian Australia reported at the weekend that Australia was spying on Indonesia at the UN climate change conference in 2007, according documents obtained by Snowden. The revelations are threatening to derail co-operation between Canberra and Jakarta on various fronts, including security and the sensitive area of people smuggling, with Natalegawa saying this week the "revelations will have a potentially damaging impact in terms of the trust and confidence between countries concerned". "One of them obviously is the agreement to exchange information, exchange even intelligence information, in fact, to address the issue of people smuggling ... to disrupt terrorism, etc,” he said at the time. “Now these information flows have been rather effective, have been rather important. We need to look at that." Agus said Commission I would offer its full support for such a review. It has been claimed that Australian surveillance collection facilities are in place at embassies in Jakarta, Bangkok, Hanoi, Beijing and Dili, and at high commissions in Kuala Lumpur and Port Moresby. The top-secret Defence Signals Directorate operates the listening posts at embassies without the knowledge of most Australian diplomats, according to documents released by Snowden and statements from a former Australian intelligence officer. The documents revealed the existence of a signals intelligence collection program – codenamed Stateroom – conducted from sites at US embassies and consulates and from the diplomatic missions of other intelligence partners including Australia, Britain and Canada. The document says the Australian Defence Signals Directorate operates Stateroom facilities at Australian diplomatic facilities. Bishop, who is making her third visit to Indonesia since the Coalition won office this year, will deliver a speech at the Bali forum on the topic of building and strengthening democratic institutions.