9.56am GMT Welcome to our hub for all Edward Snowden, NSA and GCHQ-related developments around the world, as controversy over revelations leaked by the whistleblower continue to make headlines. As arguments rage over how much of our day to day life should be monitored in the name of security, we'll be tracking the growing global debate about privacy in the digital age. We'd like to know what you think about the whole NSA story, what you're worried about – and any new areas you'd like to read more about. Good morning. Here are today’s headlines: • David Miranda, the partner of former Guardian journalist Glenn Greenwald, today launches a high court challenge over the legality of his nine-hour detention at Heathrow under anti-terror laws in August. Miranda was held and questioned under schedule seven of the Terrorism Act 2000. His lawyers are arguing his detention for the maximum period allowed was a misuse of schedule seven and breached his human rights. Miranda had nine items, including his laptop, mobile phone, memory cards and DVDs, taken from him while detained. He was stopped while changing planes on a journey from Berlin to Rio de Janeiro where he lives with Greenwald, one of the Guardian’s lead reporters on its initial reports on former NSA contractor Edward Snowden’s revelations. In Berlin he was visiting Laura Poitras, a filmmaker who had also worked with the Guardian on the first Snowden revelations. High court judges have already ruled that the material seized from him could only be examined for national security purposes and the protection of the public, and no other. My colleague Owen Bowcott will be in court.  • A US Senate panel approved its annual authorisation of funding for intelligence operations on Tuesday, including measures to increase spy agencies' ability to prevent leaks of classified information like those by Snowden. The US Senate intelligence committee voted 13-2 to approve the 2014 Intelligence Authorization Act, which authorises intelligence funding to counter terrorist threats, prevent proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and conduct covert actions around the world. • The British ambassador in Berlin was called in for a meeting at the German foreign ministry on Tuesday to explain allegations that Britain had been using its embassy to carry out covert electronic surveillance on Angela Merkel's government. • Australia's ambassador to Indonesia may be summoned to answer questions before a parliamentary commission amid growing anger in Jakarta over spying allegations. The deputy chairman of the Indonesian parliament's Commission I, which has responsibility for defence, foreign affairs and information, has also backed calls for a review of cooperation between Jakarta and Canberra on various policy fronts, including people smuggling and security. On Monday Indonesian foreign minister Marty Natalegawa labelled Australia's response to complaints that its embassy was used to collect data and eavesdrop on Indonesian interests as unacceptable. The complaints arose following stories based on documents leaked by Edward Snowden. • Revelations about the scale of US spying on the internet have badly damaged the country's negotiating power in international talks on cyberspace regulation and law enforcement, analysts and industry leaders said at a conference on Tuesday. Disclosures by Snowden about the vast scale of the intelligence agency's data collection also are undermining US efforts to maintain the internet as an entity loosely governed by a mix of national, private and nonprofit forces. "We're losing leverage internationally" to China, Russia and other countries that want to give more authority to the United Nations and governments, Hoover Institution professor Abe Sofaer said at the fourth annual meeting on international cybersecurity cooperation held by the EastWest Institute. "It's terrible." I'll have all this and more here throughout the day.