The nine-strong ISC, chaired by Sir Malcolm Rifkind, (pictured) will ask questions on a series of issues, including the mass surveillance programmes revealed by the whistleblower Edward Snowden. Photograph: Ray Tang/Rex Features The heads of Britain's three intelligence agencies – whose identities were once regarded as top secret – will on Thursday give evidence before a parliamentary committee for the first time. Sir Iain Lobban, the director of GCHQ, the MI6 chief, Sir John Sawers, and the director general of MI5, Andrew Parker, will face questions from the intelligence and security committee in a 90-minute session. It it thought the three chiefs will be asked to make brief opening remarks about the work of the agencies, with a focus on the threat to the UK from al-Qaida networks and their affiliates, as well as "lone wolf" terrorists. The nine-strong ISC, which is chaired by former foreign secretary Sir Malcolm Rifkind, will then ask questions on a series of issues, including the mass surveillance programmes revealed by the whistleblower Edward Snowden. Only a handful of officials and journalists have been invited into the room to hear the evidence. The session will also be broadcast on parliament TV – subject to a two-minute delay because of fears that secrets might be inadvertently revealed. Critics fear the members of the committee will be too deferential. Here are 10 questions they could ask to ensure they are not: 1. Stella Rimington, the former head of MI5, and David Omand, the former director of GCHQ, have said it is time for Britain's intelligence agencies to be more transparent so the public can have greater confidence in their work. Do you agree, and how will you achieve this? 2. Former minister Chris Huhne said the existence of some of GCHQ's mass surveillance programmes were kept from the cabinet – and from members of the National Security Council. Why weren't ministers allowed to know about the programmes – particularly when they were relevant to discussions about data retention set out in the so-called snooper's charter? 3. Privacy campaigners, former cabinet ministers and even a former chair of the ISC, Lord King, have called in recent weeks for the laws that govern Britain's intelligence agencies to be overhauled. The agencies have argued against any changes. Why? What do the agencies have to fear from having more up-to-date laws? 4. Edward Snowden was one of 850,000 employees and contractors who had access to the secret material he leaked to the Guardian and others. Did the chiefs know that so many people outside the UK had access to British secrets? What has been done to reduce the numbers who can see this material? 5. Last year, 550 analysts (300 British, 250 American) were working on GCHQ's Tempora programme, which analyses calls, emails and Google search traffic coming in and out of the UK. How many are working on it now? 6. Documents seen by the Guardian describe how GCHQ regards the UK's legal regime as a "unique selling point" to be exploited when collaborating with the US. Why is Britain's legal framework deemed to be so attractive to the US? 7. The Washington Post revealed this week that GCHQ had "hacked" into Google's private fibre-optic cables in the UK as part of a joint programme with America's National Security Agency. Google said this was outrageous. Did GCHQ have legal authority to do this – and if so, which minister signed the relevant "warrant" – and when? 8. The NSA eavesdropped on Angela Merkel's mobile phone for at least 10 years. Documents also show the NSA targeted the phones of another 35 government heads. Did Britain's intelligence agencies receive any transcripts of these conversations? Did GCHQ help the NSA tap any of these calls? 9. The agencies insist they seek legal approval for all their major programmes, and that if they want information from other agencies, such as the NSA, they need warrants for that material too. But do they need warrants for information offered or gifted by another agency? 10. The former home secretary David Blunkett said this week the intelligence agencies tended to "get carried away" and their claims needed to be treated with a "breath of scepticism". What do you think he meant? And wouldn't stronger oversight of the agencies be better in the long run? UK security chiefs Sir Iain Lobban, 53, has been director of GCHQ, the British electronic eavesdropping agency, since 2008. He has more than 6,000 staff under him and they spend the bulk of the three agencies' combined budget of £2bn. Lobban supports Everton football club, and declares his other interests as cricket, photography, travel and birdwatching. He studied French and German at Leeds University and passed the higher command staff course at the Defence Academy at Shrivenham before joining GCHQ in 1983. GCHQ is also in the lead in fighting cyber wars, and Lobban is appealing to cyberwarriors. "[GCHQ] can offer them a fantastic mission, but … can't compete with their salaries," he has said referring to the kind of money offered by private companies. None of the chiefs seeks the spotlight, but Lobban is probably the least well-known of them all preferring to keep himself, and his Cheltenham agency, out of the Whitehall spotlight. Sir John Sawers, 59, has been chief of the Secret Intelligence Service, or (MI6), since 2009. By tradition, he signs his correspondence – copies of which go to the Queen – with the letter "C" in green ink. Although he had a spell with MI6 in Yemen, most of his career was in the Foreign Office and included the post of UK ambassador to the UN. He was Tony Blair's foreign affairs private secretary from 1999 to 2001 and had a brief spell in Baghdad after the 2003 invasion. MI6 has a staff of 3,200 deployed worldwide, and its biggest overseas station is Kabul. Sawers was brought in to lift the shadows over MI6 following the scandal of the misleading Iraq weapons dossier. He gave the first public speech by the head of MI6 and said he believed the mechanisms set up to hold the intelligence agencies to account were inadequate. But he was pushed on the defensive by the revelation that MI6 played a role in the abduction of Libyan dissidents to Tripoli where they were abused by Muammar Gaddafi's secret police, and by damning criticism of MI6 following the death of Gareth Williams, a GCHQ officer seconded to MI6 – an incident for which Sawers apologised "unreservedly". He studied physics and philosophy at Nottingham University and lists his recreations as sport and the arts. He is due to retire next year. Andrew Parker, 50, has been director general of MI5, the domestic security service, which has a staff of 3,900 officers, since April this year. He studied natural sciences at Cambridge University, and describes himself as a keen ornithologist and wildlife photographer. In a highly provocative maiden speech last month he claimed, without naming the newspaper, that by publishing leaks from the former NSA contractor Edward Snowden, the Guardian had handed a "gift to terrorists". The claim has been questioned by MPs from all main parties and led a former director of public prosecutions, Lord Macdonald, to accuse him of using self-serving rhetoric. Parker has worked for MI5 for more than 30 years, including on Middle East terrorism, counter espionage, Northern Ireland terrorism, and serious and organised crime. He was also MI5's liaison officer in the US and deputy to the former head of MI5, Jonathan Evans. Richard Norton-Taylor