East Timorese prime minister Xanana Gusmao has joined a growing chorus of condemnation over a US-led spy network operating out of embassies and consulates across Asia, including various Australian diplomatic missions. Speaking at the Bali Democracy Forum on Thursday, Gusmao took what appeared to be a swipe at the United States and Australia over the spying allegations, saying they had "shamelessly" engaged in activities that had violated the rights of citizens in other countries. It's been claimed that Australian surveillance collection facilities are in place at embassies in Jakarta, Bangkok, Hanoi, Beijing and Dili, and high commissions in Kuala Lumpur and Port Moresby, as part of a US-led spy network. "Either we are in the presence of an extreme distrust where everyone is a potential enemy, or we are witnessing the fraudulent use of technology to obtain economic advantage over others, which is even more immoral when those others are weak and small," Gusmao said in his speech. "I ask you all whether we can really say that we are living in a democracy if we are subject to pervasive surveillance. Now that information technology is part of the fabric of our lives we have to consider the impact on democracy when our communications are being watched by others." The spying row started off between the US and its European allies but last week erupted in Asia after Fairfax published articles claiming there was a network of US intelligence facilities in the region. The articles, amplifying an earlier story by German magazine Der Spiegel, said Australian missions were also involved in the US-led spy network. Guardian Australia reported that Australia was spying on Indonesia at the UN climate change conference in 2007, according documents obtained by the whistleblower Edward Snowden. Gusmao's comments come amid growing anger over the revelations, with Indonesia and Malaysia having also been vocal critics. Indonesian foreign minister Marty Natalegawa on Monday labelled Australia's response to complaints that its embassy was used to collect data and eavesdrop on Indonesian interests as unacceptable. Natalegawa warned that co-operation between Jakarta and Canberra in various areas, including security and people smuggling, would be reviewed in the wake of the revelations. Australian foreign affairs minister Julie Bishop, who is also attending the forum in Bali, is expected to face fresh questions over the coming days. Bishop is expected to meet with Natalegawa again on Friday.