Satellite dishes at GCHQ's outpost at Bude, Cornwall, close to where trans-Atlantic fibre-optic cables come ashore. Photograph: Kieran Doherty/Reuters There should be no doubt about the importance of our security services in times of serious terrorist threats, but just as we should be clear about who and what we are against, we should also be clear about what we are defending. That is the cause of freedom – and freedom requires the vigilance of the political and legal processes that we have put in place to supervise and control those who carry out surveillance on our behalf. It also depends on good investigative journalism. That is why I think the Guardian was right to report an edited version of Edward Snowden's revelations. I suspect a jury in the UK would not convict Snowden in the face of a public interest defence, and that alone is reason enough to review the control of the security services. The Snowden revelations challenge parliament to examine the accountability of these services, and I believe two areas of that supervision need particular attention. The first concern is that acts of parliament set up to define the limits of surveillance are overtaken by technological innovation, almost before the acts are on the statute book. I hope the debate that I initiate in parliament today will give us an opportunity to look at how legislation can be updated on a regular basis, in a way that ensures government and parliament are able to maintain effective oversight. Combining a select committee process that scrutinises the implications of technological change for the security services with legislative follow-up may be part of the answer. One of the gaps in our current parliamentary system is that we do not have a select committee looking specifically at the advances in technology and their immediate impact on current legislation – and this does not just apply to the security services. A serious review of the way our legislative system can address the impact on our laws of significant technological change could be beneficial. There is a related issue about the future of the world wide web. It would be a tragedy if excessive intrusion by the US and UK gave more excuses to those governments seeking to restrict access to the internet, claiming self-defence with all that implies for the dissemination of news, views and social media. My second area of concern is the ministerial and parliamentary system of oversight. It would be churlish not to recognise the changes to supervision that have taken place in recent years. Opening an email or tapping a phone requires a warrant in the UK. But what of citizens in another democracy? And what about an ally such as Germany's Angela Merkel? Would a British prime minister know if we had been given access to information gained by one of our key allies, like the US? The "five eyes" (US, UK, Canada, Australia and New Zealand) have been sharing information for decades, and all data gathered by GCHQ's Tempora system will be available to these countries. What oversight does our parliament have of this shared system? The sharing of secret intercepts is an important part of the protection of Britain and our allies, but little is known about the way such systems are accountable. The supervisory systems of these five allies are all different and we also share information with Nato allies. One of the gaps in our accountability system concerns the sharing of data. There are a number of human rights principles that should govern communication data. Some of them are obvious, like legality, but necessity and proportionality are also important and difficult to assess. It is proportionality that appears to have been seriously lost in the activities of the NSA in the US. Finally, the willingness of MI5 and MI6 chiefs to speak in public ought to be more readily followed by GCHQ. Visits to these establishments ought to be high on the agenda of members of both houses of parliament. Balancing freedom and security is never easy but it is the essential task for any parliament.