1.18pm GMT As the election gets closer, Nick Clegg and David Cameron are succumbing more and more to the gravitational pull of party politics. There used to be a time when their ministerial speeches were relatively free of party politics. But now it is not unusual to see them deliver a speech in a Whitehall setting that is overtly partisan, and today's environment speech from Clegg is a good example. Conscious, perhaps, that the main charge against the Lib Dems remains that they broke their promises on tuition fees, you can read it as a sustained attack on the Conservatives for abandoning the "Vote blue, go green" philosophy that was once at the heart of Cameron's politics. It's not a bad speech. I can't find it on the Cabinet Office website yet, but here are the main points. • Clegg claimed that the Conservatives and Labour were both abandoning their support for environmentalism. These days, across much of the Westminster village at least, the environment is being written off by campaign chiefs on both left and right: too expensive in hard times; a distraction from more pressing debates.  On no other issue has the political establishment proved more fickle.  The same Conservative and Labour politicians who used to shout at one another across the Despatch Box: ‘you don’t care about the environment, we’re the greenest’ now turn the accusation on its head: ‘you care too much about the environment, you’re the greenest’ ... And the upshot of all of this? That the green consensus across the political parties is, I’m afraid, falling away. • He said senior Conservatives were becoming more hostile to the green agenda. In government the Lib Dems were having to resist this, he said. Senior members of the Conservative party now openly attack environmental policies as anti-growth, as well as publicly question the threat of climate change ... I was as pleasantly surprised as you were, back in 2010, to hear a Conservative Leader declare he wanted this to be the greenest government ever. And every day my colleagues and I are working hard to hold our coalition partners to their word. • He claimed that Labour's plan for an energy price freeze was not green because it would cut investment in renewables. Labour’s promise to temporarily freeze energy bills – as well as being a con, with energy companies bound to hike up prices both before and after – would also be a huge blow to our renewables sector – spooking investors and threatening billions of pounds worth of investment in green energy. The only thing green about this policy is its naivety. Labour have undermined what was their one and only green pledge – a decarbonisation target – with a policy that would damage the very industry needed to deliver it. They’re abandoning the environment to score a few populist points. It’s utterly Janus-faced. • He said the Lib Dems' commitment to the green agenda was "as strong as it ever was". The Liberal Democrats are now the only one of the three main parties which still sees the environment as a priority, and we take our responsibilities extremely seriously here.  • He defended the government's lobbying bill, and cited the need to protect the Green party as an example of why strict controls on election spending by non-partisan campaigning organisations were needed. The legislation the government has put forward does not in any way affect the day to day work of charities. All it seeks to do is to make sure that people with very deep pockets cannot distort the democratic process, subverting the legitimate role of democratic parties.   Let me give you an example. At the moment you could have the oil industry going down to Brighton Pavilion and saying, “Don’t vote for the Greens, because the lights will go out if they get re-elected”. Nothing stops big oil from basically hijacking the Brighton Pavilion electoral contest. This kind of thing is not an idle threat – we have seen it in the US and here at the last General Election spending by non-party organisations doubled. So we have to act. • He said the reaction to his plan for a 5p plastic bag tax was universally positive - contrary to what he had been told to expect. This showed people did still care about green issues, he said. A few weeks ago, I announced a 5p charge on throw-away plastic bags. I cannot tell you how many people advised me against it. I was warned that this was the wrong time. It would be presented in the media as a tax on hardworking people. I would look out of touch.  Yet every single person I have spoken to about it since has told me they support the move. Even the few who have grumbled to me that they would have preferred Government to foot the cost have still agreed: if it reduces the carrier bags blighting our countryside and harming our wildlife – which it will – it’s a small price to pay. • He said seeing green measures as anti-growth was a mistake. We must never, ever talk about consumers as if they are somehow divorced from the wider economy. The UK’s green industry is worth around £128 billion and employs almost a million people. We’re relieved when we hear that the economy is expected to grow this year by 1.4%. Well between 2011 and 2012, the low carbon and renewable sector grew by around 3% and it’s expected to keep on growing.  So whenever someone tells you that we can’t afford to go green, correct them: we can’t afford not to. If you are for the environment, you are for cutting bills, growing our economy and creating jobs ... My Coalition partners talk a lot about winning the global race. Well, this is one area where we are in pole position and it would be a huge mistake to take our foot off the pedal now: economic myopia of the worst kind. • He announced plans to promote the use of electric cars. Elon Musk, a pioneer of electric vehicles in the US and CEO of Telsa Motors, will advise the government on "how we can reach the UK tipping point for electric vehicles more quickly", Clegg said. And he said he was launching a "call for evidence" to find ways of promoting demand for electric cars.  I especially want to hear from fleet purchasers, and that includes those in the private and public sector, cab companies and others about what they would need to make the jump from buying low emission to specifically ultra-low emission vehicles. We already have some excellent tax incentives to help drive adoption of this technology in the crucial fleet sector. But what else can we do? If we get this right, we can help secure the UK’s position as a global leader in ultra low emission vehicles, and that would be a huge boon for our economy, and our environment too. • He said the Lib Dems were looking at the case for setting up a statutory body to advise the government on the natural environment. It could operate like the committee on climate change, he suggested. • He said the Lib Dems wanted the Green Investment Bank to be allowed to borrow on the markets "as early as possible in the next parliament".  • He said the government would introduce a new national pollinator strategy next spring to protect the country's bees. Nick Clegg. Photograph: Barcroft Media Updated at 1.24pm GMT