9.25am GMT The intelligence and security committee is different to parliamentary select committees, a fact noted by many MPs in last week’s Westminster Hall debate on the security services. The committee was established in 1994 to examine the three intelligence agencies and the intelligence work of the Cabinet Office, Ministry of Defence and Home Office, and was reformed earlier this year, giving it greater powers and allowing it oversight of operational activity and “the wider intelligence and security activities of government”. Unlike select committees, whose members and the majority of whose chairs are now elected by their fellow MPs, the members of the ISC are appointed by parliament only after nomination by the prime minister. They can be members of the House of Commons and the House of Lords, and serving ministers cannot be chosen. The chair is chosen by the PM. Sir Malcolm Rifkind, the current chair, said last week that in future the committee would chose its own leader. Rifkind is a former foreign secretary and his role has been criticised in that he might be required to scrutinise decisions he made himself when he was in power. Labour’s Diana Johnson has called for reforms to the committee to give greater protection to whistleblowers and has said an opposition MP should be its chair. At Monday’s Riba debate on the Snowden revelations, Tory MP Rory Stewart made the same point, arguing: "You are never going to have a government backbencher chairing a committee that is going to criticise the government properly.” The current members of the committee are: • Sir Malcolm Rifkind MP, former Tory foreign secretry (chair) • Hazel Blears MP, former Labour communities secretary • Lord Butler of Brockwell, crossbench peer • Sir Menzies Campbell MP, former Lib Dem leader • Mark Field MP, former Tory shadow minister • Paul Goggins MP, former Labour Northern Ireland minister • George Howarth MP, former Labour undersecretary in the Northern Ireland Office and Home Office • Julian Lewis MP, former Tory shadow minister • Lord Lothian QC, former deputy Tory leader Today’s session with the heads of MI5, MI6 and GCHQ will cover “the terrorist threat, regional instability and weapons proliferation, cyber security and espionage”. But it will not cover “details of intelligence capabilities or techniques, ongoing operations or sub judice matters”. On Monday Alan Rusbridger, the editor of the Guardian, predicted that the spy chiefs would use the session to claim that terrorists had now “gone dark” – or disappeared from their view – as a result of the paper’s stories. He quoted a 2011 article by Peter Swire of Ohio State University and Kenesa Ahmad of the Future of Privacy Forum – written before the Snowden revelations – arguing that security agencies have used the “going dark” argument for a long time, when in reality we are currently living in a “golden age of surveillance”. The article noted: This post casts new light on government agency claims that we are “going dark.” Due to changing technology, there are indeed specific ways that law enforcement and national security agencies lose specific previous capabilities. These specific losses, however, are more than offset by massive gains. Public debates should recognize that we are truly in a golden age of surveillance. It added: A simple test can help the reader decide between the “going dark” and “golden age of surveillance” hypotheses. Suppose the agencies had a choice of a 1990-era package or a 2011-era package. The first package would include the wiretap authorities as they existed pre-encryption, but would lack the new techniques for location tracking, confederate identification, access to multiple databases, and data mining. The second package would match current capabilities: some encryption-related obstacles, but increased use of wiretaps, as well as the capabilities for location tracking, confederate tracking and data mining. The second package is clearly superior - the new surveillance tools assist a vast range of investigations, whereas wiretaps apply only to a small subset of key investigations. The new tools are used far more frequently and provide granular data to assist investigators. Swire is now on Barack Obama's panel reviewing the powers of the NSA.