The MI6 building in central London. Photograph: Felix Clay for the Guardian The former legal chief of MI5 and MI6 told a hearing at the European parliament that Britain should adopt a French model of judicial oversight of the intelligence agencies to limit abuse. Speaking to MEPs at a European parliament hearing in Brussels on Thursday , David Bickford, who held his post from 1986 to 1995, rejected a "root and branch" reform of intelligence laws or the creation of new national or EU-level oversight committees in reaction to the Edward Snowden scandal. He said MI5 and MI6 needed the means to hunt criminals who "have access to the most sophisticated forms of communication". "If the number of regulations proliferate … you will stifle the agencies and you will not be protected," he said. But he said the British system, in which government ministers authorise covert surveillance operations and MPs look into cases of abuse "ex post facto" is "not adequate," however. The French model, in which a judge weighs up national security needs against people's rights "at the coalface" of individual operations is the best compromise, he said. The system "allows intelligence agencies to do their work while limiting the margins for abuse", Bickford said. At the EU hearing, privacy advocates and jurists voiced outrage at Snowden's revelations that US, British, Dutch, French, German and Swedish intelligence services routinely snoop on millions of European citizens. "We need to ban mass surveillance. I just don't see how that's compatible with human rights," Gus Hosein, the head of the London-based NGO, Privacy International, said. "In the 1990s we said the internet was the new Wild West. Now we have government actions as the Wild West," he added. "The suspicions of economic espionage are very serious here," said Iain Cameron, a legal expert attached to the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg. Earlier, two academics who co-authored a new study on mass surveillance, said the activity violates European law and called on MEPs to take action. They said the EU and US "transnational guilds" of spies have breached basic articles of the EU treaty, such as article 4.3 on "sincere co-operation," as well as privacy clauses in the EU charter of fundamental values and in the European charter of fundamental rights. They also noted that EU agencies, such as the joint police body, Europol, and the EU foreign service's intelligence-sharing branch, IntCen, are in all likelihood using data "stolen" from European citizens. "It's no longer credible to say the EU has no legal competence and should do nothing on this," one of the two, Spanish jurist Sergio Carrera, said. The study urges MEPs to block an EU-US free trade agreement unless the US and EU countries disclose the full nature of their surveillance activities. It also says MEPs should push EU countries to draft a "professional code for the transnational management of data" and set up a permanent intelligence oversight body at EU level. But Ian Leigh, a law professor at Durham University, joined Bickford in pouring cold water on the ideas. He said the reality of intelligence co-operation is that countries do it bilaterally or in "tight" groups instead of using EU structures. He added that national legislatures or expert committees are the only ones who have the legal mandate and the "trust" for intelligence services to work with them in a meaningful way.