The security chiefs at Thursday's intelligence and security committee hearing. 'Shouldn't public scrutiny be at the heart of the way our intelligence and security service operates anyway?' Photograph: Reuters Tv/Reuters It wasn't only the security chiefs being scrutinised, but those conducting the scrutiny. Now that we have been granted a glimpse into the activity of the intelligence and security committee, do we feel reassured they were doing the job that we need them to do, to assure ourselves that oversight worked? Many of us could reasonably be sceptical of a committee handpicked by the prime minister, and which made mistakes over extraordinary rendition. It is of course welcome that this session happened at all: 38 years after the CIA director first gave public evidence to Congress, we are finally catching up. However, from my own select committee experience, what occurred on Thursday seemed more like a cosy chat. Nevertheless, it ought to establish the principle that security chiefs can give evidence in public without the sky falling in, and I look forward to them appearing before the home affairs select committee in our counter-terrorism work. But this initial session has been useful. Journalists, commentators and bloggers will be poring over each sentence uttered. This sort of public scrutiny is exactly what we need to restore confidence in our intelligence service, whose work keeps us safe. It does make you wonder why this should have been such a massive event: shouldn't public scrutiny be at the heart of the way our intelligence and security service operates anyway? Of course, sometimes it will be necessary to hold private sessions but this should be the exception. Some have argued that the very nature of the intelligence and security services means that there has to be a great deal of secrecy, but I am not asking for details to be discussed, just principles. Should we be spying on our own citizens? Is it reasonable and proportionate that every click we make online is monitored and saved for an eventuality that may never come? Is it right and proper that we spy on our allies, tapping into their personal phones? Can our embassies be used as listening posts? These questions can be debated at length and should be debated in public. I recently held a parliamentary debate on oversight of the intelligence and security services. It was incredibly well attended and views from every side were represented. I did not agree with all of them, and some of the things that were suggested were frankly ridiculous. But one key point that did emerge was a general agreement from across the divide of opinions that the Snowden leaks demonstrate the NSA is insecure and can't protect its own information. If it is true that what was leaked contained information that was directly damaging to our security, as opposed to just being very embarrassing, why were hundreds of thousands of contractors able to access it all? Why were names of UK agents so widely available? We should be relieved that this information went to the Guardian, which has made a point of publishing carefully and responsibly. The NSA and British agencies should be thanking the Guardian for its hard work. What we need now is substantial reform of our oversight mechanisms. The ISC must become a creature of parliament, not the executive, and be furnished with the resources needed. But we also need an independent body – perhaps like President Obama's privacy and oversight board, which includes civil society representatives. We need more transparency about what sort of information companies are required to provide, and the legal basis for the actions of the intelligence and security agencies. We are also dealing with outdated, over-broad and excessively complex legislation – this needs an independent review. On Thursday the agency heads said: "You set the law. We will work within the framework of the law." So let us work to ensure we can have confidence in the laws we have put in place.