Five months ago, the heads of Britain's spy services would probably have had little appetite for appearing before a parliamentary committee to talk about their work. But in some respects Thursday's session in front of the intelligence and security committee could not have come a moment too soon for them; here, at last, a platform from which to vent a summer of pent-up frustration at the leaks from Edward Snowden, to a group of MPs and peers only prepared to soft-mouth them during 90 minutes of questions and answers. The chiefs did not miss the opportunity to make their point, though critics of the ISC will wonder how they were allowed to say so much without being challenged more robustly – and why certain issues were avoided completely. As head of GCHQ, Sir Iain Lobban had the most to get off his chest. He didn't name Snowden or any of the media groups across the world that have published stories on his documents when he made the most startling assertion of the session. But with oblique references to stories in the Guardian and the New York Times about how GCHQ and America's National Security Agency have worked to undermine commercial encryption packages, he said these disclosures had made life easier for terrorists, who had been alerted to these secret initiatives and are now trying to find new methods to communicate. Paradoxically, he said he knew this because British agents were still listening to them: "What we have seen over the last five months is near-daily discussion among our targets. We have seen terrorist groups in the Middle East, in Afghanistan and elsewhere in south Asia discussing the revelations in specific terms, in terms of the communications packages they use, the communications packages they wish to move to. "We have actually seen chat around specific terrorist groups, including closer to home, discussing how to avoid what they now perceive to be vulnerable communications methods or how to select communications which they now perceive not to be exploitable." Sir John Sawers, head of MI6 and very much the leader of this pack, added: "Our adversaries are rubbing their hands with glee. Al-Qaida is lapping this up." Neither Lobban nor Sawers were asked about the damage that had been done by western intelligence efforts to weaken encryption standards in the first place – and how numerous experts have said this has made it easier for criminals, terrorists and other hostile states to hack into sensitive material owned by those who rely on this software to keep their secrets safe. There was no mention, either, of a leak to the US media in August that American officials said had done much more damage than anything published by Snowden. Analysts had detected a sharp drop in communications between al-Qaida terrorists when it emerged in reports the US had intercepted messages between Ayman al-Zawahiri, who succeeded Osama bin Laden as the head of al–Qaida, and another al-Qaida leader, Nasser al-Wuhayshi. One United States official, quoted by the New York Times, said of the communications: "The switches weren't turned off, but there has been a real decrease in quality." None of the chiefs were asked to comment on the analysis of Peter Swire, a former White House chief privacy counsellor and now on President Obama's review panel of the NSA, who says agency claims of their world "going dark" have to be treated with scepticism, because setbacks in some areas are "more than offset by surveillance gains from computing and communications technology". Closer to home, the former home secretary David Blunkett this week urged a healthy degree of caution when it comes to the claims of the agencies, because in his experience, they tend to "get carried away". The Snowden documents revealed that GCHQ, by undertaking technically brilliant but potentially intrusive mass surveillance programmes, now believes it is in a "golden age". But Lobban was not asked to explain how his agency has reached this point, or why the public – and indeed members of the ISC – had not been told about all the capabilities he says the agencies now rely on. Asked whether he would now disclose them to the committee, Lobban said he would – in private – though during the entire public session neither he nor any member of the ISC mentioned Tempora at all. This is the programme that allows GCHQ to suck up vast amounts of data from the cables that carry internet traffic in and out of the country, information that is analysed and shared with the NSA. Neither Lobban, Sawers nor the head of MI5, Andrew Parker, wanted to accept there was any necessity for the public to know about this kind of activity, or acknowledge the concerns there may be about the reach of such a powerful capability, or what laws are being used to justify its use. Lobban did not deny GCHQ was collating vast amounts of information, but he said his teams were "motivated by finding terrorists and serious criminals". He said: "We don't want to delve into innocent emails and phone calls." This depiction of programmes as benign entities was accepted without question by the committee, but it did not explain why the ISC had not been told about Tempora in the first place, or why, as Chris Huhne revealed, neither the cabinet nor the National Security Council were informed about it either. During the only exchanges where the chiefs were really pressed, there was some begrudging acceptance from them that it might be better for the agencies if they were a little more transparent – that the laws which permit them to do what they do should be updated, and that the scrutiny could be tougher. Lord Butler, the former cabinet secretary, asked them: "Can you see why it is that the public feel that when the last bit of legislation on this was passed in 2000, and technology has moved on so fast and your capabilities have developed so hugely, that it is hardly credible that this legislation is fit for purpose in the modern world?" Parker said the public didn't really understand the "combination of arrangements" that keep the agencies honest, though he did concede that "we are going down the road of more openness". Sawers and Lobban appeared more prepared to contemplate changes in the legal framework. "If there are changes in the law, so be it," said the head of GCHQ. "You set the law and we will work within it," added Sawers. Over 90 minutes, those who have attacked Snowden were armed with more ammunition. Those who were hoping for a valued contribution to a more rounded debate about privacy and surveillance in the internet age, and the balance between the public's right to know and the agencies' need to keep secrets, may feel they were short-changed. "They faced a grilling that wouldn't have scared a puppy," said Shami Chakrabarti, director of Liberty. "It was tame, predictable, and limp," said Privacy International. Nick Pickles, director of Big Brother Watch, added: "As the US president, world leaders and international experts express concern about the scale of surveillance and the need to review the laws and policies involved, today was perhaps more unique for the fact parliament found three people who think there is no need for reform."