The foreign minister, Julie Bishop, has given Indonesia assurances that Australia does not want to do anything to harm relations between the two countries amid ongoing tension over recent spying allegations. Bishop met with her Indonesian counterpart, Marty Natalegawa, on Friday in Bali where the two foreign ministers have been attending a forum on democracy. The visit, Bishop's third to Indonesia since the Abbott government came to power, comes in the wake of diplomatic fallout stemming from claims Australia's embassy in Jakarta had been part of a regional spy network. While publicly both Bishop and Natalegawa have insisted the relationship between Canberra and Jakarta remains strong, the reaction in Indonesia to the spying claims has made it clear that tensions remain. Bishop confirmed the issue of spying was raised, but refused to say whether she had provided any undertakings that it would stop. "I took aboard the concerns that have been raised. We take them all very seriously," she said. "I did assure minister Natalegawa that the Abbott government would not want to do anything to harm what is a strong and vibrant relationship. "We believe that the Australia-Indonesia relationship is one of our highest foreign policy priorities and we continue to work hard and in consultation with Indonesia to ensure that both our countries benefit from our mutual engagement." But Bishop refused to provide any assurances that Australia would cease its spying activities in Indonesia. "The Australian government does not, as a matter of principle, comment on intelligence matters." Natalegawa made no comment on the spying issue following the bilateral meeting after earlier in the week labeling Australia's initial response in relation to the issue unacceptable. The seasoned diplomat has warned that co-operation on areas such as people smuggling may be reviewed as a result of the spying revelations. The espionage row started off between the US and its European allies but erupted in Asia after Fairfax Media published articles claiming there was a network of US intelligence facilities in the region. The articles, amplifying an earlier story by German magazine Der Spiegel, said Australian missions were also involved in the US-led spying network. Guardian Australia reported at the weekend that Australia was spying on Indonesia at the UN climate change conference in 2007, according to documents obtained by the whistleblower Edward Snowden.