Top eight stories on MediaGuardian Phone-hacking trial told NoW safe held intimate details of David Blunkett affair Court hears that lawyer's safe held recordings of 330 voicemail messages of then home secretary FBU chief says his phone was targeted News of the World investigator Glenn Mulcaire was found with Andy Gilchrist's private phone details, Old Bailey jury hears Gary Lineker and Clare Balding lead BBC Games team Programmes including The One Show and BBC Breakfast to be broadcast from Glasgow for 11-day duration of 2014 Games Spanish TV station staff revolt at closure Presenters take to air to denounce Valencia government's decision to close publicly funded station RTVV Clegg criticises Jeremy Paxman's 'sneering' Deputy PM attacks Newsnight presenter after he said he could understand Russell Brand's disillusionment with politics Twitter experiences share stampede Share price went above $50 at one point before closing at $44.90, but analysts warn that present valuation is unsustainable Tesco to launch Christmas TV ad early Retailer to run festive campaign before John Lewis and Asda, who will screen their ads during The X Factor Richard Kay to step down as Mail's gossip columnist Standard's Sebastian Shakespeare tipped as new Daily Mail columnist. Top comment on MediaGuardian A simple question for new FCC chair Tom Wheeler: which side are you on? Dan Gillmor: Tom Wheeler is the new head of the agency overseeing US 'airwaves'. Will he be a reformer or another industry lackey? Today's headlines The Guardian British spy chiefs vent fury at leaks. P1, 6, 7 "A land grab and a gold rush': flotation sees loss-making Twitter's value soar to $30bn. P3 Nick Clegg says Paxman makes good living sneering at politics. P5 Netflix enlists superheroes in ratings battle. P9 Intimate details of Blunkett's affair were kept in News of the World safe, trial hears. P15 Paper 'hacked my phone over affair with Sven', says Faria Alam. P15 BBC's Lonely Planet deal sharply criticised. P16 Two detectives referred to IPCC over Savile. P17 Greek riot police evict staff of defunct state TV. P24 Staff in revolt as Spanish TV station closes. P24 Jingle tills: stores bet big on festive advertising. P27 Vodafone risks incurring Ofcom fine over 3G mobile coverage lag. P29 Editorial: Intelligence and transparency – Nothing to see here. P34 Daily Telegraph Security leaks helped al-Qaida change tactics, say spy chiefs. P1, 4 Guardian leaks 'discussed daily by our enemies', say spy chiefs. P4 Clegg tells Paxman to stop sneering. P12 Police in Savile case referred to watchdog. P15 Boris Johnson urges editors to stick press regulation charter 'in the privy'. P16 Hacking trial told of intimate calls to mistress by Blunkett. P17 Comment: Silicon Valley – Living in a world of their own. P25 Editorial: Spy chiefs shed little light on their secrets. P27 Advertising: The two minutes that launch Christmas. P29 Twitter shoots sky high as investors scramble for shares. B1 Twitter faces a tall order to repay the faith of markets. B2 Tablets and smartphones have changed the face of Christmas shopping. B2 Vodafone fails to honour 3G rollout pledge. B5 Street believes John Lewis advert has the X Factor to 'own Christmas'. B5 Financial Times Life is tweet for Twitter founders after company valued at $30bn. P1, 21 Spies consider being more open. P2 Blunkett voicemail recordings found in News of the World safe, court told. P2 BBC criticised for disastrous acquisition of Lonely Planet. P4 Feature: The upstart editor with a devoted girl following. P14 Vodafone misses regulator target for UK 3G coverage. P18 Stores tune into Christmas spirit with advertising. P22 Analysis: Vodafone slips as analysts curb excitement on talk of AT&T bid. P33 The Times Al-Qaida is 'lapping up' the leaks, say top spies. P1, 8 BBC is too big and too left-wing, says former executive. P7 Paxman accused of 'sneering' hypocrisy. P7 Savile officers face inquiry on abuse claims. P15 Lineker to lead BBC Games coverage. P16 Blunkett's 'intimate messages' to his lover were among hundreds of taped voicemails. P20 Leveson pair's affair under fresh scrutiny. P20 Ken Dodd says sitcoms are too rude. P23 Comment: A smaller BBC would be good for audiences. P30 Editorial: Many voices – The licence fee should be cut and the BBC should cease to be a publisher. P32 Editorial: Secrets and truths – When is a spy no longer a spy? When he's a spy chief. P32 Buskers in face-off with internet giant over naming rights. P39 Asda sells £5 phone for the inner Scrooge. P39 Greek police armed with teargas end state television sit-in. P47 Twitter spreads its wings and soars on market debut. P53 Vodafone told to play catch-up on 3G service. P53, 54 BT enters pitch battle over TV football coverage. P53, 54 Analysis: Twitter frenzy. P57 The Independent Twitter stock market flotation. P1, 8 Intelligence chiefs break cover, with all guns blazing. P4, 5 Recordings of Blunkett's love messages found in News International safe. P12 Savile detectives referred to police watchdog. P26 Advertising: John Lewis is animated – but will it stay in the top three. P27 Feature: The Zuckerberg guide to the web. P39, 40, 41 i Snowden leaks have caused huge damage, intelligence chiefs tell MPs. P6 Instant millionaires after flotation sees Twitter value double in minutes. P23 'Wapping lawyer kept Blunkett affair tapes in safe'. P25 Vodafone escapes Ofcom 3G penalty. P50 Wall Street Journal Europe Twitter soars on first day of trading. P1, 20. Analysis. P21, 28 Greek police end broadcast siege. P5 UK officials say leaks hurt intelligence effort. P6 Smartphones turn focus to top of camera market. P17, 18 Daily Mail John Lewis's £7m Christmas advert to air on Saturday. P3 Boris Johnson says plans to regulate press 'belong in the privy'. P4 Old Bailey told David Blunkett's messages for lover were hacked by the News of the World. P5 Faria Alam sold her love story to the News of the World after her phone was hacked. P5 Spy chiefs say a-Qaida 'lap up Guardian leaks'. P10 UK staff hit Twitter jackpot in sell-off. P13 Nick Clegg criticises Jeremy Paxman over sneering at politics. P20 Kay Burley marks her 28-year TV career by saying she's proof that older women can work on TV. P26 BBC lost £100m on travel guide flop. P35 Jan Moir: I'm gripped by Gogglebox. P39 Andrew Marr on his life-changing private passion. P52 Twitter is flying high after debut on market. P78 Daily Express Hackers 'snooped on Blunkett's intimate voicemails for lover'. P7 Sven fling with FS secretary Faria 'exposed by investigator'. P7 Clegg slams Paxman for 'sneering at politics'. P19 Tweet day of success. P59 The Sun Twitter shares rocket from £16 to £28. P6 Spy chiefs face MPs. P8, P9 Court told 'hacking exposed Blunkett three-year affair'. P15 X Factor coverage. P17 John Lewis Christmas ad to debut during X Factor. P17 Nick Clegg slams Jeremy Paxman for 'sneering' at politics. P23 Two detectives referred to police watchdog over handling of sex claims against Jimmy Savile. P27 Olympic gold medallist Rebecca Adlington signs up for I'm a Celebrity. TV Biz P1 Paul O'Grady accuses Alan Titchmarsh of stealing his chatshow ideas. TV Biz P2 Daily Mirror Clegg: Paxman's £1m to sneer. P2 Blunkett's secret love agony 'taped'. P8 Spy chiefs face MPs. P8, 9. Editorial. P10 MPs get Sky Sports free. P19 Feature: JLS Marvin's big role on BBC. P22, 23 Daily Star Spymasters slam Edward Snowden and the Guardian for leaks. P2 Jeremy Clarkson blasts the BBC after they put him up at the world's worst hotel. P3 Ant and Dec to star in Morrison's Christmas ad. P6 Court told Glenn Mulcaire was paid £750 to hack David Blunkett and his lover's phones. P9 Strictly Come Dancing coverage. P11 BBC's biggest news stars in revolt over new tax system. P18 Paul O'Grady blasts Alan Titchmarsh for copying his show. P41 Go to MediaGuardian