9.47am GMT Welcome to our hub for all Edward Snowden, NSA and GCHQ-related developments around the world, as controversy over revelations leaked by the whistleblower continue to make headlines. As arguments rage over how much of our day to day life should be monitored in the name of security, we'll be tracking the growing global debate about privacy in the digital age. We'd like to know what you think about the whole NSA story, what you're worried about – and any new areas you'd like to read more about. Good morning. Yesterday the heads of GCHQ, MI5 and MI6 gave evidence to the parliamentary intelligence and security commitee in public for the first time. I live-blogged it here, and here’s how the Guardian reported it this morning: • Britain's three senior spy chiefs came into the public glare for the first time to claim that leaks by the former NSA analyst Edward Snowden were being "lapped up" by the country's adversaries, but also to concede that the disclosures had prompted discussion with the government over how to be more transparent about their methods, writes Patrick Wintour. Despite an often gentle first public cross-examination of the heads of MI5, MI6 and GCHQ, some members of the intelligence and security committee, including the former head of the civil service Lord Butler, expressed their concern at the legal oversight of the intelligence agencies. Butler said it was hardly credible that the legislation governing the agencies was "still fit for purpose for the modern world". After the session, Sir Menzies Campbell, a Liberal Democrat member of the ISC, also called for a review of the law, "not least to provide the public with a sense of reassurance and confidence that there is a substantial legal framework". A third ISC member, the Tory MP Mark Field, also revealed that members felt they had not been told about the intricacies of GCHQ's capabilities, demanding in private "at the earliest opportunity a comprehensive update on collaborations that are taking place with overseas intelligence agencies" – including, by implication, the US National Security Agency. Sir Iain Lobban, the head of GCHQ, agreed to do so. The 90-minute session came most alive when the spy chiefs expressed their cold fury at the Edward Snowden disclosures in the Guardian and other papers, claiming that they would lead for years to an "inexorable darkening" of their knowledge of those threatening the country. • Five months ago, the heads of Britain's spy services would probably have had little appetite for appearing before a parliamentary committee to talk about their work, writes Nick Hopkins. But in some respects Thursday's session in front of the intelligence and security committee could not have come a moment too soon for them; here, at last, a platform from which to vent a summer of pent-up frustration at the leaks from Edward Snowden, to a group of MPs and peers only prepared to soft-mouth them during 90 minutes of questions and answers. The chiefs did not miss the opportunity to make their point, though critics of the ISC will wonder how they were allowed to say so much without being challenged more robustly – and why certain issues were avoided completely. As head of GCHQ, Sir Iain Lobban had the most to get off his chest. He didn't name Snowden or any of the media groups across the world that have published stories on his documents when he made the most startling assertion of the session. But with oblique references to stories in the Guardian and the New York Times about how GCHQ and America's National Security Agency have worked to undermine commercial encryption packages, he said these disclosures had made life easier for terrorists, who had been alerted to these secret initiatives and are now trying to find new methods to communicate. Paradoxically, he said he knew this because British agents were still listening to them: "What we have seen over the last five months is near-daily discussion among our targets. We have seen terrorist groups in the Middle East, in Afghanistan and elsewhere in south Asia discussing the revelations in specific terms, in terms of the communications packages they use, the communications packages they wish to move to. "We have actually seen chat around specific terrorist groups, including closer to home, discussing how to avoid what they now perceive to be vulnerable communications methods or how to select communications which they now perceive not to be exploitable." • Thirty-four terror plots targeted against the UK have been disrupted by the security services and police in the last eight years, the director general of MI5 told the intelligence and security committee. • Here Matthew Weaver looks at 10 key questions the Guardian thought the spy chiefs should have been asked. Were those questions asked and if so what were the answers? • Here Michael White sketches the scene. • Spy chiefs can give evidence without the sky falling in – so let's reform oversight, argues Lib Dem MP Julian Huppert. • An American or European visitor would have been most struck by what the committee did not ask, a Guardian leader column suggests: it barely touched on the substantive issues raised by the Snowden documents. It skated over any serious questioning about the complex issues to do with mass surveillance, civil liberties or privacy. There were no questions about GCHQ's reported involvement in agencies helping themselves to traffic between Google data servers. There was nothing on the bugging of world leaders who might be considered allies, not enemies. Nothing on the reliance on corporate partners – "well beyond" what they are legally required to do. And nothing on the issue raised by Sir Tim Berners-Lee – the "appalling and foolish" weakening of internet encryption with potentially terrible consequences for individuals and businesses. These matters have been widely discussed in this country, including in such subversive journals as the FT and the Economist. Indeed, they have been debated in every serious newspaper and legislature in the world. They will become manifest in reformed laws, treaties and alliances. But there was little suggestion today that much of this was of true concern. Instead there was a kick at the "global media". Let us be clear. The loss of Snowden's material was plainly damaging for western intelligence. The disaster was that the US agencies have, for the second time in three years, proved incapable of keeping enormous secret databases secure. After WikiLeaks it is astonishing that 850,000 people worldwide were able to peer into the heart of secret operations in Cheltenham. No NSA official has apologised or resigned for this devastating failure and there were only the mildest questions today as to why GCHQ went along with these bizarre arrangements. The intelligence agencies were saved from true catastrophe by only one thing: the fact that Snowden didn't dump the material on to the web, but handed it instead to journalists. Together with the New York Times and Washington Post, we have worked carefully and responsibly (in consultation with governments and agencies) to disclose a small proportion of what he leaked. Some would like newspapers gagged or prosecuted. Be careful what you wish for. Kick newspapers by all means, but, without them, be prepared for something much worse. • Yesterday was also the second and final day of David Miranda's legal challenge of his detention at Heathrow airport in August. Miranda is the partner of former Guardian journalist Glenn Greenwald, who was heavily involved in the first of the paper’s Snowden revelations. Judgment will be delivered at a later date. Here Owen Bowcott reports on the day’s events at the high court. Jason Beer QC, for the Metropolitan police, said officers wanted to know how the encrypted material was arranged: whether it was split into material that was be disclosed and material that would not be published. "[They] may have [been considering] to do as Mr Assange has done and upload all the material on to a blog," he suggested. "It was a legitimate concern to see whether the material was arranged in that way." ... Beer added: "The police had received a request from the security services to make the stop seem as routine as possible." Between 60,000 and 100,000 people a year are examined in port stops every year. "The definition of section one [of the Terrorism Act] is exceptionally broad … Terrorism is terrorism, whatever the motives" At that point Mr Justice Ouseley, one of three judges considering the case, intervened to comment: "Just as well it was not in force during world war two, it might have applied to the French Resistance." • Meanwhile the former legal chief of MI5 and MI6 told a hearing at the European parliament that Britain should adopt a French model of judicial oversight of the intelligence agencies to limit abuse. I'll have all this and more throughout the day today.