Illustration by Gary Kempston I don't doubt that John Sawers is correct when he states re the Snowden leaks "It is clear our adversaries are rubbing their hands with glee. Al-Qaida is lapping it up" (British spy chiefs vent fury at leaks, 8 November). Doubtless they also lapped up the revelations of British involvement in extraordinary rendition, security service participation in torture of detainees, and the unlawful killings documented during the Al-Sweady inquiry. However, if our security services consistently traduce the values they claim to defend, the responsibility for any benefit accruing to al-Qaida lies with the security forces, not with those who expose their actions and their hypocrisy. It's clear Sawers and his ilk use secrecy to commit grotesque abuses of the principles they purport to uphold. Little wonder they fear exposure. Nick Moss London • The Guardian has done an excellent job of bringing the Snowden revelations into the public arena, such that meaningful debate can take place about what we are willing to tolerate as a society. This and many other actions by government are excused on the basis that they are required to stop terrorist attacks on our country. I think it is time for an equally open debate about why this threat exists. What are we doing that people are willing to risk or even give up their lives to stop? Let's ask the people we are afraid of to explain why they hate us so much. The truth may be uncomfortable, but at least we can discuss more effective ways of getting to the root causes of the problem. Jim Pettman Anglars-Juillac, France • Your leader (8 November) makes the point that assassination "only works if there are no consequences [for the assassins]". A point well illustrated by the ongoing use of drones as blunt instruments of assassination by people who make precisely that assumption. Jon Bell Machynlleth, Powys • According to the heads of our intelligence services, al-Qaida and its subsidiary organisations were completely unaware of how their communications were accessed by the agencies until the publication of Edward Snowden's leaks. Obviously Frederick Forsyth's latest work is not available in Afghanistan, Pakistan, Somalia, Yemen etc. Brian Hartigan Banstead, Surrey • Who would readers most prefer to be deeply involved in the nation's security: Lobban, Parker and Sawers, or Greenwald, Rusbridger and Snowden? The Guardian should hang its head in shame at the way it has tried to vilify our security personnel and beatify the leakers. Robert Carlin Leeds • My wife, who grew up in communist Poland, said watching the three heads at the parliamentary committee reminded her of the nonsense she would hear from Polish government officials. The only difference is the language. Dominic Tkaczyk Welwyn, Hertfordshire • The spooks' appearance before Malcolm Rifkind's committee was akin to facing underarm bowling in the nets. In future they should appear before Margaret Hodge's committee, where she leads with a range of fast bowling and googlies more suited to these slippery characters. Les Bright Exeter, Devon • It beggars belief that while most government services are mired in waste and incompetence – from the MoD to universal credit, from the Border Agency to the NHS – the secret services, alone, sail serenely above it all, unsullied and unique. They never make a mistake, never put a foot wrong and, of course, are never subject to proper public scrutiny. Ian Martin Falmouth, Cornwall • Now we've seen the heads of MI5, MI6 and GCHQ, it is ironic that in the 1930s people fleeing persecution in Germany came to Britain. Today people take refuge in Germany to avoid prosecution in Britain. How times have changed in 80 years. LJS Lesley Liverpool