International publishers are sending a "press freedom mission" to Britain because of concerns about "government interference in the regulation of the independent press." The World Association of Newspapers and News Publishers (WAN-IFRA) describes the decision to send a delegation of publishers and editors to the UK as "unprecedented". Vincent Peyrègne, chief executive of the Paris-based WAN-IFRA, said: “We cannot underestimate our concern for what is happening. “It is rather difficult for the United Kingdom to lecture Sri Lanka and others about their press freedom record when its own actions result in such widespread international condemnation.” The mission is a direct response to recent actions that are viewed by many publishers and editors as inimical to press freedom, such as the passing of the royal charter to create a new system of press regulation plus legislation over court costs. It will also consider the criticism of The Guardian for its coverage of the revelations from the former NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden. Peyrègne said: “We are concerned that these actions not only seriously damage the United Kingdom’s historic international reputation as a staunch defender of press freedom, but provides encouragement to non-democratic regimes to justify their own repressive actions." The mission's announcement coincides with this week's biennial Commonwealth heads of government meeting in Sri Lanka, where press freedom is expected to be high on the agenda. The WAN-IFRA delegation will arrive in London in January and will include publishers and editors from five continents. It is expected to meet with government and opposition leaders, press industry figures, civil society organisations and others. In advance of the mission, said Peyrègne, “we will be talking with our members in the Commonwealth and beyond, to collect information on the impact the UK actions are having on their own situations.” WAN-IFRA has previously conducted press freedom missions to countries such as Ethiopia, Libya, Yemen, Tunisia, Mexico, Honduras, Ecuador, Colombia, Guatemala and Azerbaijan. It represents more than 18,000 publications and over 3,000 media companies in more than 120 countries. Sources: WAN-IFRA/Newspaper Society