Theresa May has criticised newspapers for publishing stories based on Edward Snowden's NSA leaks. Photograph: David Cheskin/PA Theresa May has become the latest Tory cabinet minister to criticise the publication of stories based on Edward Snowden's NSA leaks, saying anything that "potentially gives help to terrorists" is something the government "needs to be concerned about and act on". The home secretary, speaking to the Society of Editors annual conference in London on Monday, warned newspaper editors that they have to "recognise their responsibilities" to national security alongside their "natural desire to have a story in their newspaper". However, May admitted that deciding whether the publication of leaked material was in the public interest was "not an easy area" and noted that the Guardian had gone through "various processes" available before running stories based on the Snowden leaks. "It is the case that anything that reveals security issues, which by definition are kept secret for a purpose and potentially gives help to terrorists, is something the government needs to be concerned about and act on," said May. Asked about newspaper reports based on leaks by whistleblowers, such as the revelations in the Guardian and elsewhere by former NSA analyst Snowden, May said newspaper editors "did not always know the impact of the material in national security terms" of the information they had been given. "We have a security service and intelligence agencies that have to operate on a secret basis," she said. "We need to make sure terrorists don't get information that will help them in their tasks." May was asked at the conference by former BBC executive Phil Harding whether an editor, when approached by someone with intelligence material, should "look at it, consider publishing it, or merely walk to the nearest police station and hand the memory stick over". May said she supported recent comments by MI5 chief Andrew Parker, who said Snowden's NSA leaks gave terrorists "the gift to evade us and strike at will". Harding followed up by asking who it was that should make the judgment whether the information was in the public interest, or jeopardised national security. "Well, erm, I don't ... you asked whether they should take it to the nearest police station or whether they should," replied May. I think there are processes available. There is a process available – obviously there are various processes it went through in relation to the Guardian's material, discussions with government at a senior level about that. "There is of course the D-notice committee that is available that looks at material and is from time to time in discussions with the press. That is not an easy area." "There is an onus on every editor looking at material of that sort to recognise their responsibilities as well as the natural desire to have a story in their newspaper." May's comments followed fresh criticism over the weekend from government government ministers over the Guardian's handling of the Snowden leaks, with foreign secretary William Hague and Philip Hammond, the defence secretary, saying its revelations had endangered national security. But the two ministers sidestepped questions whether they would like to see a prosecution, after former defence secretary Liam Fox wrote to the Crown Prosecution Service asking whether there is a case for legal action against the paper. • To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for publication". • To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian on Twitter and Facebook.