9.41am GMT Welcome to our hub for all Edward Snowden, NSA and GCHQ-related developments around the world, as controversy over revelations leaked by the whistleblower continue to make headlines. As arguments rage over how much of our day to day life should be monitored in the name of security, we'll be tracking the growing global debate about privacy in the digital age. We'd like to know what you think about the whole NSA story, what you're worried about – and any new areas you'd like to read more about. At 2.45pm today the Commons home affairs committee will be discussing counter-terrorism with David Anderson QC, the independent reviewer of terrorism legislation, and Charles Farr, the director-general of the Office for Security and Counter-terrorism at the Home Office. I’ll be live-blogging it on this blog, and you’ll be able to watch it live here. Also today: • World leaders have been understanding about leaked revelations that the US spied on them as they know it was not all done under the orders of Barack Obama, US secretary of state John Kerry has said, as Rowena Mason reports. In an interview with the BBC, Kerry said foreign governments understood the US president did not personally authorise all the surveillance, which included tapping the mobile phone of the German chancellor, Angela Merkel. Asked about the talks held with foreign leaders over the revelations, Kerry said they had been "very respectful, very understanding. We're all trying to find a way forward that respects privacy, rights, that fights terrorism, that doesn't interfere with people." Earlier, Kerry acknowledged that the leaders had legitimate questions about the extent of US National Security Agency phone and internet surveillance revealed in stories by the Guardian and other newspapers based on documents leaked by the whistleblower Edward Snowden. There has been public outrage about the spying in some European countries, leading them to demand information from the US about the extent of its spying on its allies. Kerry told the BBC: "The president has ordered a full review into what we're doing. People understand that the president didn't order all these things, this happened over a long period of time, it's been an evolutionary process, we now need to define it more effectively and that's what the president is setting out to do." • The UK's information commissioner has expressed concern about the extent of the NSA's surveillance revealed by Edward Snowden, saying that issues of national security cannot be allowed to overshadow concerns of legitimate public interest, reports John Plunkett. Christopher Graham, head of the independent data protection body which reports to parliament, told the Society of Editors' annual conference that he was very concerned by reports of the scale of online eavesdropping but stopped short of criticising the security agencies. "Security cannot trump every other consideration," he said on Monday. "We don't have that public confidence [in the security services]. That has been the real damage. We have to find a mechanism to bring that back on track." Liberty's director, Shami Chakrabarti, asked about the impact of the Snowden revelations on the security services' attempts to tackle terrorism, said: "I'm sure it creates challenges and irritations [but] any challenges are probably overblown. The serious bad boys know all about the technological possibilities." • The Washington politician who is leading efforts to reform US surveillance practices has warned European politicians that his legislation faces a difficult ride through Congress and resisted calls to expand the law by adding provisions to protect the privacy of foreigners, Dan Roberts reports from Washington. Representative Jim Sensenbrenner told a meeting of the civil liberties and justice committee of the European parliament to focus hopes on diplomatic negotiations instead – pointing to a key Washington meeting next week, between EU commissioner Viviane Reding and US attorney general Eric Holder. Sensenbrenner's testimony, thought to be the first by a US congressman before a committee of the European parliament, points to the difficulties that reformers in Washington face in assembling a coalition to push reform legislation though Congress. Although recent revelations that the National Security Agency eavesdropped on foreign leaders have reignited the political debate over surveillance practices, it is not a feature of the key reform bill sponsored by Sensenbrenner and the Democratic Senator Patrick Leahy, which largely focuses on limiting the NSA's domestic powers to collect bulk data in the US. • In the first likely structural reform of the National Security Agency since the Guardian began publishing Edward Snowden’s revelations, the Obama administration is giving strong consideration to appointing a civilian to run the surveillance apparatus and splitting it from the military command that has been its institutional twin since 2010, reports Spencer Ackerman in Washington. • The wide distribution of centrally-collated data that allowed NSA contractor access to so many secret documents appeared to be a kneejerk bureaucratic response to the failure of US security and intelligence agencies to share information which, if joined up, should have alerted them to the 9/11 al-Qaida attacks on the US, writes Richard Norton-Taylor. I’ll have live coverage of all developments here throughout the day.