Shadow attorney general Mark Dreyfus has accused the prime minister of playing politics with national security after Tony Abbott linked spying allegations to the former government. Dreyfus called Abbott’s words “absolutely embarrassing for Australia”. Appearing on ABC’s 7.30 program on Wednesday night, Abbott was asked about recent allegations of spying on Indonesia and the effect they had on relations between the two countries. Abbott replied by questioning the time at which the alleged spying occurred, then answered for himself, saying “under the former government”. “All governments gather information, that's hardly a surprise. It's hardly a shock. We use the information that we gather for good, including to build a stronger relationship with Indonesia,” he said. Australian intelligence agencies have been intercepting phone calls and data through diplomatic posts as part of an international spying network, according to recent revelations from Edward Snowden. It was also revealed that the Australian spy agency, defence signals directorate (DSD), working alongside the NSA, specifically spied on Indonesia during the 2007 UN climate change conference Bali. The incident sparked tension between government representatives of both nations, with Indonesian foreign minister Marty Natalegawa saying it was just “not cricket” and that they were “deeply concerned”. Australian foreign minister Julie Bishop would not be drawn on the alleged surveillance activities. "The Australian government does not, as a matter of principle, comment on intelligence matters,” she said. Dreyfus said the issue with Abbott’s statement was not the apparent admission of spying. “I don’t think it’s a secret that Australian government agencies gather information,” he told Guardian Australia. “You’ll see ASIO advertising regularly for new employees.” However, to make “suggestions as to what occurred under the former government” is to play politics with national security and is “reckless”, he said. “It’s unprecedented to have a prime minister seeking to take political advantage out of national security and intelligence matters, and that’s the only way to read this. “I don’t know quite what his intention was other than seeking political advantage. But it is a direct breach with a very longstanding convention that has been in place for many decades in Australia, that governments – and oppositions for that matter – do not comment on operational intelligence matters and this is directly commenting on operational intelligence matters. “Seriously, if this prime minister continues to behave in this way it’s potentially damaging to our international relationships and potentially damaging to our national security,” Dreyfus said. The attorney general, George Brandis, whose department oversees security agencies, told Guardian Australia that the government maintained the longstanding practice of not commenting on intelligence matters. “I have read the transcript of the prime minister’s interview last night and in my view, nothing went beyond that principle,” he said. The prime minister’s office has been contacted for comment.