11.33am GMT Welcome to our hub for all Edward Snowden, NSA and GCHQ-related developments around the world. As arguments rage over how much of our day to day life should be monitored in the name of security, we'll be tracking the growing global debate about privacy in the digital age. We'd like to know what you think about the whole NSA story, what you're worried about – and any new areas you'd like to read more about. Here's a roundup of the latest developments: • Gauging the scope of the NSA's surveillance operations would in itself compromise the privacy of ordinary citizens, Obama administration officials have told a Senate hearing, Wired magazine reports. The Senate judiciary committee was debating proposals by Democrat Sentator Al Franken to force the US government to release figures on the number of Americans who have been pried on by programmes exposed by Edward Snowden's disclosure. Robert Litt, the general counsel for the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, and Bradford Wiegmann, deputy assistant attorney general, told the Committee on Privacy, Technology and the Law that it would have a “privacy diminishing effect” if intelligence officials were forced to review every piece of data vacuumed up under its internet and phone surveillance programs. In a joint written statement they said: Attempting to identify the numbers of persons or U.S. persons whose communications or information may be incidentally collected would, in practice, have a privacy-diminishing effect directly contrary to the aims of this bill. Attempting to make this determination would require the intelligence community to research and review personally identifying information solely for the purpose of complying with the reporting requirements, even if the information has not been determined to contain foreign intelligence. Such an effort would conflict with our efforts to protect privacy. • Legal restrictions banning technology companies from reporting government requests for information should be lifted, according to the Global Network Initiative, a coalition of tech firms and civil rights advocates, committed to free expression. In a joint article for the Guardian, its chairman, Jermyn Brooks and director of policy, David Sullivan, said: Unless we know not only how many of these orders governments make, but also how many companies receive, it will be impossible for individual users of communications services to grasp the scale and scope of surveillance ... By allowing a full accounting of national security surveillance orders demanded by the authorities and received by companies, governments committed to protecting rights online have an opportunity to lead by example, and begin to regain some of the moral high ground they have recently lost. • Hundreds of embattled staff at the NSA's Maryland headquarters have been given a pep talk, by a leading Republican Congressmen, in attempt to boast their morale, Politico reports. Peter King, a member of the House's intelligence and homeland security committees, told the website: “They really feel that they’re under siege. Whether from Snowden, politicians, the media, daily stories, daily attacks, very few people are publicly supporting them.” • The technology giant Cisco Systems has cited public concern about internet surveillance revealed by Snowden, as an explanation for its sliding revenues, the FT reports. New orders fell 12% in the developing world, with Brazil down 25% and Russia off 30 per cent, a sharp reversal from the 8% jump experienced in the preceding three months. The collapse coincided with the international furore over disclosures that the NSA had taken advantage of the strong position of US technology companies to extend its surveillance of the global internet, raising concerns about a backlash against American companies such as Cisco. • Italian prime minister Enrico Letta has assured lawmakers that the privacy of Italian leaders and ordinary citizens has not been violated by the NSA's surveillance, AP reports.. Letta gave a closed-door briefing Wednesday to Parliament’s commission on intelligence and security matters. Lawmakers later told reporters that the premier assured them that there have been no violations that he is aware of regarding private communications or data involving ordinary citizens and members of government.