David Cameron answers questions at the Indian Institute of Management Calcutta. Photograph: Rupak De Chowdhuri/Reuters David Cameron has described being bombarded with questions about the Philippines disaster, Sri Lanka's human rights and the antics of troublesome ministers as like "being in an asteroid shower". Cameron said he feels like things are flying at him every day when he was asked about the job of being prime minister by Indian students. Speaking on his first visit to Kolkata, he said the keys to doing the job were having a trusted team and a clear plan. "It's like sometimes being in a sort of asteroid shower. You have got things flying at you every day. Should you be going to Sri Lanka? What are you going to do about famine in the Philippines? Why has this minister done that, why has that politician … ? All these things are coming at you." During the question-and-answer session at the Indian Institute of Management Calcutta, Cameron was also questioned about Britain's relationship with the EU, the model of the NHS and the impact of the US whistleblower Edward Snowden's revelations. Asked by one student whether the scandal about Project Tempora, GCHQ's programme to tap subsea internet cables, had damaged the government, Cameron defended the need for spying to keep the country safe from bombings such as the attacks on London and Mumbai. "We have a rule in British politics that we don't comment on intelligence and security issues but that would be a rather boring answer to your question so let me say a little bit. "It is perfectly legitimate for countries to have intelligence and security organisations. Our job as government, our first priority is national security … when you think of the horrendous attacks in Mumbai or London and other parts of the UK like Manchester, if we can take steps to prevent those attacks happening you should take those steps." Cameron said there was a danger with "damaging" revelations, such as Snowden's leaks, of "helping the terrorists, of helping organised criminals". He said there was "pretty good" oversight of the intelligence agencies and the UK was not closed-minded to improving governance. However, Cameron added: "But let's not be naive and think we live in a world where you don't need intelligence and security. We do."