The Australian government should “urgently” clarify the revelations that its spy agencies have attempted to listen in to the phone calls of the Indonesian president warning “the damage has been done”, a senior spokesman for the president’s office said. Teuku Faizasyah, the president’s spokesman for foreign affairs, warned in a statement sent by text to Guardian Australia and the ABC that: “[The] Australian government urgently needs to clarify on this news, to avoid further damage.” On Monday, Guardian Australia and the ABC revealed that Australian intelligence agencies had attempted to listen in to the personal phone calls of the Indonesian president, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, and targeted the phones of his wife, senior ministers and advisers. Hatta Rajasa, co-ordinating minister for economic affairs, and one of those shown in the documents to have been targeted by the Australian authorities, also called for clarity. Speaking in English to Guardian Australia and the ABC, Rajasa, who was state secretary at the time his personal phone was targeted, said: "I would like to [see] a clarification of this, whether it is true or not before I make a comment." But he later told Guardian Australia in Bahasa he was “concerned if there’s tapping”. “As state secretary I had communications containing classified information," he said. "There were talks that shouldn't be made public. We have our own transparency law on information and there is no need to tap. State secrets are protected by the law and they shouldn't be made public. If the tapping were true, you know very well that it isn't good. It is not right.” Rajasa, one of the president’s closest supporters, said the overall reaction should be proportionate until further clarification was offered. A member of Indonesia's Foreign Affairs Commission, Tantowi Yahya, said the commission was holding an internal meeting on Monday afternoon and would discuss the phone tapping issue. He said it's "very disappointing to know that it has been happening again and again". Tantowi said the issue was also jeopardising the spirit of friendship between the two countries. Sidarto Danusubroto, the Speaker of the People's Consultative Assembly told Viva News: "It's unethical to claim to be a good friend but conduct tapping at the same time. "The foreign affairs minister has shown a strong stance and I fully support the ministry taking further significant actions." Both the Department of Foreign Affairs in Canberra and the Australian embassy in Jakarta have so far refused to comment on the revelations, which are likely to further damage relations between the two countries.