Former Indonesian vice president Yusuf Kalla – named as a “target” of Australian surveillance in 2009 in leaked documents published by Guardian Australia and the ABC – has denounced the act of spying on a friendly nation as “illegal” and said Indonesia would protest strongly. The Abbott government is trying to calm the angry reaction in Indonesia to the revelations that Australia's spy agencies attempted to listen in on the personal phone calls of the Indonesian president, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, and targeted the mobile phones of his wife, senior ministers and confidants. But Kalla said the story was “hot news in Indonesia” because “it is against the law if you are tapping your friend”. “This is illegal … we don’t expect that our friend will be tapping our personal communications … of course Indonesia will protest because they are tapping the officials, the president, and others like me.” “That is why the explanation by the Prime Minister is not enough, they should apologise or say sorry,” Kalla said, citing the response by the US to revelations that it had been listening in on the phone of German chancellor Angela Merkel. Speaking in parliament, the prime minister, Tony Abbott, insisted that “all governments gather information and all governments know that every other government gathers information.” He said Australian governments, of both political persuasions, have had a policy not to comment on “specific intelligence matters” but always used “resources at (their) disposal, including information, to help our friends and our allies, not to harm them.” Teuku Faizasyah, the Indonesian president’s spokesman for foreign affairs, demanded “urgent clarification” of the reports “to avoid further damage”. “The damage has been done and now trust must be rebuilt,” he tweeted. But senior analysts said the story, a joint project by Guardian Australia and the ABC, based on documents from whistleblower Edward Snowden, would seriously exacerbate tensions between the countries – already under strain from earlier spying revelations and the new government’s policy to “turn back” asylum seeker boats. Indonesia and security experts said the specific nature of the revelations, the inclusion of the president’s wife Ani Yudhoyono on the list of targets and the timing of the leak in the lead up to next year’s presidential election were likely to provoke a particularly strong reaction from Indonesia. “This is a very serious leak … this document looks boastful, it looks like it is trying to overstate what Australia is doing … and it will be particularly provocative to Indonesia,” said former defence officer and strategic affairs commentator Allan Behm. “The inclusion of the president’s spouse on the list certainly makes in more inflammatory … why would you need to target, why would you need to target her?” Professor Tim Lindsey, Indonesia expert at Melbourne university, said the tensions in the bilateral relationship appeared to be “heading towards a quite serious situation”. “The tension over the boats, the previous revelations about spying, and now these new revelations … this is heading towards quite a serious situation … a quite significant moment of tension which could get worse and needs immediate attention at the highest levels.” Targeting of intelligence efforts is determined by senior defence, intelligence and foreign affairs officials in a process called National Intelligence Collection Requirements (NICRS). It remains unclear whether such high level surveillance of the Indonesian leader and his inner circle would have had to be sanctioned by the Rudd government, which was in power in November 2009, the date on the PowerPoint presentation document that has been leaked. Joel Fitzgibbon, who was defence minister until June 2009 told Guardian Australia, “I won’t be talking to you about that”, and Senator John Faulkner, who succeeded him, also declined to comment. Greens Senator Scott Ludlum said the “overreach” by the intelligence agencies had reached “tipping point” and demanded an immediate inquiry into the damage being caused. “Are we seriously meant to believe that the president of Indonesia, his wife and his leadership team are a national security threat to Australia?” Senator Ludlum asked. “Australian intelligence gathering has been absorbed into the US national security state, which is widely accepted in the US to be out of control and in urgent need of reining in.” Questioned about the revelations in New Delhi, the foreign minister, Julie Bishop, said: “There are always challenges in any relationship. That is why they need constant nurturing and attention and that is why I keep in close communication with (Indonesian) foreign minister (Marty) Natalagawa [and] with president Yudhoyono.”