10.02pm AEST Here's a summary of where things stand: Australia/Indonesia spying row • Secret documents published jointly by Guardian Australia and the ABC, have revealed that Australian intelligence services have attempted to listen in on personal phone calls of the Indonesian president, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, and his inner circle. Leaked slides reveal voice calls of Yudhoyono monitored over 15 days in August 2009. • Indonesia has reacted with fury and recalled its ambassador to Australia as part of wholesale review of its diplomatic relations with Canberra. Foreign minister Marty Natalegawa said Indonesia was not satisfied with Australia's explanations. Yudhoyono is reported to be "devastated" by the reports. • Australia's prime minister Tony Abbott refused to comment directly on the disclosures when challenged about them in Parliament.  The government "uses all the resources at its disposal, including information to help our friends and our allies, not to harm them," he said. • Australia's Green Party has called for an inquiry into “surveillance overreach” and its effect on diplomatic relations, businesses and personal privacy. Leader Christine Milne calls revelations "an embarrassment." Other Snowden-related developments • Britain's intelligence chiefs may have exaggerated the threat posed to national security by the leaking of the NSA files, according to a former lord chancellor who has questioned whether the legal oversight of MI6, MI5 and GCHQ is "fit for purpose". Lord Falconer of Thoroton said he was sceptical of the claim by the heads of GCHQ, MI6 and MI5 that the leaks represent the most serious blow to their work in a generation, and warned that the NSA files highlighted "bulk surveillance" by the state. "Although I take very seriously what they say [about the importance of secrecy] I am sceptical that the revelations about the broad picture have necessarily done the damage that is being asserted," he told the Guardian. • A private deal was struck with the heads of MI5, MI6 and GCHQ to ensure they did not face any surprises when they appeared before the intelligence and security committee last week, according to the Sunday Times. The agreement followed a year of delicate negotiations and was a condition for the three spy bosses to subject themselves to public cross- examination, it said. • A programme devised by British intelligence allowed analysts to monitor the bookings of foreign diplomats at 350 top hotels across the world, according to documents leaked by Snowden. The German news magazine Der Spiegel reported on Sunday that the automated system alerted the UK's eavesdropping centre, GCHQ, to the timings and locations of diplomats' travel arrangements.The papers make clear that these details allowed the "technical operations community" to make necessary preparations before the visits, the magazine said, suggesting that the diplomats' rooms would be monitored or bugged. Updated at 1.10am AEST