Spying, we are often told, is an area of endeavour where the truth of what is going on, and what those in positions of power know to be going on, is too unpalatable for the public. Therefore, according to this argument, when the truth leaks out – as it did this week through Guardian Australia and the ABC courtesy of the revelations of whistleblower Edward Snowden – politicians must feign an outrage they don’t really feel in order to satisfy wounded voter sensibilities. If it really was that simple, Indonesia's president, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, and his foreign minister, Marty Natalegawa, are extraordinarily good at acting outraged. It seems more likely that Indonesia and Australia presumed each was spying on the other, but that the Indonesians were genuinely surprised and angry at the overt targeting of the personal mobile phones of the president, his inner circle and his wife. Australia certainly knew that Indonesia has been spying on us. The former In­donesian intelligence chief Abdullah Mahmud Hendropriyono admitted in an interview in 2004 that Indonesia's state intelligence agency had bugged Australia's Jakarta embassy during the 1999 East Timor crisis. He said the practice had been abandoned once the two countries started co-operating on counterterrorism. The Australian prime minister at the time, John Howard, steadfastly said nothing. And Indonesia already knew Australia’s embassy had been spying back. Leaks from Snowden, published in Der Spiegel last month, had established that. Indonesia protested strongly but, by the time of the visit to Australia of the vice-president, Boediono, the damage appeared to be contained. The difference with the latest leak appears to be the specific information about who was targeted. At least some of those who have been “in the know” seem genuinely surprised by what has been revealed, or at least willing to concede that such surveillance is a matter of fine ministerial judgement. The former Labor foreign minister Bob Carr said the minister who would have had to sign off on such surveillance (presumably Kevin Rudd’s first defence minister, Joel Fitzgibbon, who held the job until June 2009, or else his successor, Senator John Faulkner) should have thought a bit harder about the benefit of what might be learned versus the cost to the bilateral relationship should the surveillance be revealed. The former Coalition foreign minister Alexander Downer said all such decisions about surveillance came with a risk assessment which the relevant minister had to weigh. (The process of approving such sensitive surveillance is opaque but, according to intelligence sources, appears to involve a meeting of the heads of intelligence agencies and foreign affairs and defence to set Australia’s intelligence gathering priorities, which are then signed off by the national security committee of cabinet. Specific surveillance requests would have to be signed off by the relevant minister – which for the Defence Signals Directorate would be the minister for defence.) Indonesia’s reaction is therefore more likely fuelled both by genuine anger and by the deep public embarrassment that such high-level surveillance has been made public. In the first instance, Tony Abbott must now judge the best way to calm things down and on that score the two former foreign ministers disagree. Downer thinks Abbott’s refusal to comment on intelligence matters is the right course, that Australia is best advised to let the furore blow over. Carr thinks an assurance that such surveillance would not be attempted in the future – along the same lines as the one the US president, Barack Obama, gave the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, when it emerged the NSA had been listening in on her – would be better advised. In parliament on Tuesday, Abbott said Australia should not be expected to apologise, while Bill Shorten said an apology might be wise. More broadly Australia now confronts the same questions being asked of governments around the world: whether there are limits to what can be done in the interests of national security.