Tony Abbott says Australia should not be expected to apologise nor to explain in detail the steps it takes to protect its citizens, in a statement to parliament responding to the diplomatic furore over revelations that Australian surveillance targeted the Indonesian president, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, his wife and his inner circle. Indonesia has demanded an explanation and an apology, but Abbott insisted this would not happen, although the bilateral relationship was “the most important single relationship that we have”. “In the past 24 hours there have been calls for Australia to detail our intelligence operations and to apologise for them,” Abbott told parliament. “The first duty of every government is to protect the country and to advance its national interests, that is why every government gathers information and why every government knows that every other government gathers information … there is no greater responsibility for a prime minister than ensuring the safety of Australian citizens and the security of our borders and that indeed is why we do collect intelligence. National security requires a consistent determination to do what is best for Australia and that is why this government will support the national security decisions of previous ones as we will expect future governments to respect ours. “Australia should not be expected to apologise for the steps we take to protect our country now or in the past, any more than other governments should be expected to apologise for the similar steps that they have taken ... importantly in Australia’s case we use all our resources including information to help our friends and allies, not to harm them. “Similarly ... Australia shouldn’t be expected to detail what we do to protect our country any more than other governments should be expected to detail what they do to protect theirs. Others should ask of us no more than what they are prepared to do themselves,” Abbott said. "I don't believe Australia should be expected to apologise for reasonable intelligence-gathering activities." He said he sincerely regretted any embarrassment to Indonesia caused by “recent media reports”. The opposition leader, Bill Shorten, said the bilateral relationship needed to be “above party politics” but “the next few days are of the utmost importance”. “Disagreement should not be allowed to fester. The government needs to quickly and effectively remediate the situation,” he said. Shorten suggested Australia should take a different approach. "I believe, for instance, that the example of the United States and the way that it handled a similar issue with Germany, provides the opportunity for us to consider the same course of action," he said. The revelations of attempted spying against Indonesia were revealed on Monday by Guardian Australia and the ABC. Yudhoyono subsequently accused Abbott of “belittling” Australia’s attempts to tap his phone and those of other senior Indonesian politicians. Tweeting in Bahasa on his official account, Yudhoyono said: “I regret the Australian PM statement belittling the phone-tapping in Indonesia without feeling guilty. We are reviewing a number of co-operation agendas because of the damaging Australian behaviour … The action by the US and Australia is damaging the strategic partnership with Indonesia, a democratic nation.” Indonesia recalled its ambassador, Nadjib Riphat Kesoema, to Australia and is reviewing all co-operation. He returned to Canberra from Brisbane on Tuesday morning and was due to fly to Jakarta later in the day. Indonesia’s foreign minister, Dr Marty Natalegawa, said he was "flabbergasted" by the revelations, which he described as “nothing less than an unfriendly act” which “violates every single decent and legal instrument I can think of”. The revelations come from a Defence Signals Directorate (DSD) slide presentation dated November 2009, during the former Labor administration. Bob Carr, Labor’s foreign minister from 2012, has said the government must apologise for the spying and “carve out what is off limits” for intelligence gathering in future. Carr said the revelations were “nothing short of catastrophic” for the bilateral relationship and that Abbott’s response to date had been “too dismissive by far”. Carr suggested Abbott could apologise and then agree to “carve out areas we won’t touch” in a similar way to Barack Obama’s statement that the US was not currently monitoring the phone of the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, and would not do so in future. Carr also suggested ministers would have “signed off” on the decision to spy on the Indonesian president, his wife and his inner circle, saying “you’d like to think the hand of a minister would hover before signing off” on such a proposal. He said ministers should have considered whether the gains from such eavesdropping were “so vital” that they outweighed the risk to national security of the practice becoming publicly known. Guardian Australia understands from several intelligence sources that the defence minister would normally have to approve such high-level surveillance targets. That minister was Joel Fitzgibbon until June 2009, and then John Faulkner. Both have declined to comment. The documents, published by the Guardian and the ABC and leaked by the NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden, show that the DSD targeted the phones of Yudhoyono and his wife, as well as those of eight other high-profile Indonesian politicians, among them possible successors to Yudhoyono. Addressing the leak on Monday, Abbott said "all governments gather information and all governments know that every other government gathers information" and vowed that Australia used "resources at [their] disposal, including information, to help our friends and our allies, not to harm them". Natalegawa dismissed these claims. "I have news for you," he said. “We don't do it. We certainly should not be doing it among friends.” He said he was unhappy with the "dismissive answers being provided" by Canberra