The ABC’s managing director, Mark Scott, has been questioned about the publication of revelations that exposed Australia’s attempts to spy on Indonesia by tapping the mobile phone of the president, his wife and a group of prominent Jakarta officials. Scott faced questions during a Senate estimates hearing in Canberra on Tuesday, which required him to explain why the national broadcaster allowed the publication of documents with a top secret security classification. The story was a joint project by Guardian Australia and the ABC, and Scott was asked to detail the precise nature of the partnership with Guardian Australia which allowed publication of the stories based on documents leaked by the NSA whistleblower, Edward Snowden. Scott was asked by the Liberal senator, Anne Ruston, whether any money had changed hands concerning the stories that were published simultaneously by both outlets on Monday. “No, certainly not,” he said. He said there was nothing unusual in the ABC collaborating with other media outlets on investigations, and he pointed to the Guardian’s policy of collaborating with other respected media partners around the world on the Snowden revelations. Joint ventures for the ABC, Scott said, were “not atypical”. Scott said Guardian Australia had supplied the documents to the ABC and the broadcaster had embarked on an independent investigation. The ABC had sought legal advice, the stories were reported independently and were published as soon as practicable, he said. He suggested the ABC was able to offer Guardian Australia reporting depth and a broadcast platform. “The Guardian came to us,” Scott said of the origin of the primary source material. “We worked in partnership with them. We did investigate the story independently and report the story independently.” Scott said the ABC chose to publish the spying revelations on public interest grounds. In explaining this position to senators, Scott pointed to the distinction between the public interest – the professional motivation pursued by journalists – and the national interest. “I think the test we apply is whether releasing this material is in the public interest. I always draw a distinction. Some people talk about the national interest and there is talk about the public interest,” Scott told the estimates hearing. Scott said the specific component of public interest in the stories published in co-operation with Guardian Australia since Monday was the extent of intelligence gathering by agencies and governments; and how the information was subsequently shared. He said the debate that had been sparked in Australia since publication was very similar to debates seen in the United Kingdom and the United States since the existence of the Prism program was revealed by Edward Snowden. Scott said very senior politicians in the US had reflected that intelligence activity in the digital age had over reached. He suggested there was public interest in ensuring digital surveillance was proportionate. “There are very significant debates that come off the back of this,” he said. Scott acknowledged that the release of the material “might be embarrassing” and “may cause some difficulties in the Australia-Indonesia relationship in the short term”. But he drew a parallel between the Indonesian expose and the reporting of the Australian Wheat Board kickbacks scandal in the mid-2000s. The AWB story was broken and pursued vigorously by The Australian newspaper, owned by News Corp. “To draw a parallel with another story, the reporting that was done on the activities of the Australian Wheat Board certainly caused embarrassment, it caused damage to Australia in the short term, but I think we would say that that reporting was absolutely in the public interest. It was probably in the national interest in the long term.” Reporting on the AWB exposed the fact that officials paid bribes to the regime of Saddam Hussein in contravention of United Nations rules.