The PM's office has released the full statement made by Tony Abbott on Indonesia at the start of question time.  In the past 24 hours there have been calls for Australia to detail our intelligence operations and to apologise for them. Madam Speaker, the first duty of every government is to protect the country and to advance its national interests. That’s why every government gathers information and why every government knows that every other government gathers information. Madam Speaker, there is no greater responsibility for a prime minister than ensuring the safety of Australian citizens and the security our borders and that, indeed, is why we do collect intelligence. National security, Madam Speaker, requires a consistent determination to do what’s best for Australia and that’s why this government will support the national security decisions of previous ones as we will expect future governments to respect ours. Madam Speaker, Australia should not be expected to apologise for the steps we take to protect our country now or in the past, any more than other governments should be expected to apologise for the similar steps that they have taken. Importantly, in Australia’s case, we use all our resources, including information, to help our friends and allies, not to harm them. Similarly, Madam Speaker, Australia shouldn’t be expected to detail what we do to protect our country any more than other governments should be expected to detail what they do to protect theirs. Others should ask of us no more than they are prepared to do themselves. Madam Speaker, I want to make it absolutely crystal clear that Australia has deep respect for Indonesia, for its government and for its people. I regard President Yudhoyono as a good friend of Australia, indeed as one of the very best friends that we have anywhere in the world. That’s why, Madam Speaker, I sincerely regret any embarrassment that recent media reports have caused him. But Madam Speaker, it is in everyone’s interests – Indonesia’s no less than Australia’s – that cool heads prevail and that our relationship grows closer, not more distant. I pledge myself to build the strongest possible relationship with Indonesia. After all, due to its size, proximity and potential to be an emerging democratic superpower of Asia, it is the most important single relationship that we have.