8.07am GMT Welcome to our hub for all Edward Snowden, NSA and GCHQ-related developments around the world. As arguments rage over how much of our day to day life should be monitored in the name of security, we'll be tracking the growing global debate about privacy in the digital age. We'd like to know what you think about the whole NSA story, what you're worried about – and any new areas you'd like to read more about. Here's a roundup of the latest developments: • The technology used by Britain's spy agencies to conduct mass surveillance is "out of control", raising fears about the erosion of civil liberties at a time of diminished trust in the intelligence services, according to the former Liberal Democrat leader Lord Ashdown. The peer said it was time for a high-level inquiry to address fundamental questions about privacy in the 21st century, and railed against "lazy politicians" who frighten people into thinking "al-Qaida is about to jump out from behind every bush and therefore it is legitimate to forget about civil liberties". "Well it isn't," he added. Ashdown talks frequently to the deputy prime minister, Nick Clegg, and is chair of the the Liberal Democrats' general election team. Though he said he was speaking for himself, his views are understood to be shared by other senior members of the Liberal Democrats in government, who are also keen for some kind of broad inquiry into the subject. This idea is also supported by Sir David Omand, a former director of GCHQ. He told the Guardian he was in favour of an inquiry and thought it would be wrong to "dismiss the idea of a royal commission out of hand". It was important to balance the need for the agencies to have powerful capabilities, and the necessity of ensuring they did not use them in a way parliament had not intended, Omand added. Ashdown is the latest senior politician to demand a review of the powers of Britain's intelligence agencies – GCHQ, MI5 and MI6 – and the laws and oversight which underpin their activities. • Private firms are selling mass surveillance technologies to developing countries which promise "off the shelf" equipment to allow them to snoop on millions of emails, text messages and phone calls, according to a new cache of documents. The papers show how firms, including dozens from Britain, tout the capabilities at private trade fairs aimed at offering nations in Africa, Asia and the Middle East the kind of powerful capabilities that are usually associated with government agencies such as GCHQ and its US counterpart, the National Security Agency. A database compiled by Privacy International shows how firms from the UK, Israel, Germany, France and the US offer governments a range of systems that allow them to secretly hack into internet cables carrying email and phone traffic. The index has details from 338 companies, including 77 from the UK, offering a total of 97 different technologies. One firm says its "massive passive monitoring" equipment can "capture up to 1bn intercepts a day". Some offer cameras hidden in cola cans, bricks or children's carseats, while one manufacturer turns cars or vans into surveillance control centres. • A secret court order that authorised a massive trawl by the National Security Agency of Americans' email and internet data was published for the first time on Monday night, among a trove of documents that also revealed a judge's concern that the NSA "continuously" and "systematically" violated the limits placed on the program. The order by the Fisa court, almost certainly its first ruling on the controversial program and published only in heavily redacted form, shows that it granted permission for the trawl in part because of the type of devices used for the surveillance. Even the judge approving the spying called it a “novel use” of government authorities. Another later court order found that what it called "systemic overcollection" had taken place. Transparency lawsuits brought by civil liberties groups compelled the US spy agencies on Monday night to shed new light on the highly controversial program, whose discontinuation in 2011 for unclear reasons was first reported by the Guardian based on leaks by the former NSA contractor Edward Snowden. • Australia's prime minister attempts to downplay the disclosure that his security services had tapped the phone of the Indonesia's president and his inner circle, have been criticised by Jakarta. Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono said: "I regret the Australian PM statement belittling the phone-tapping in Indonesia without feeling guilty. We are reviewing a number of cooperation agenda because of the damaging Australian behaviour." Guardian Australia is tracking the continuing fallout from the revelations in Canberra and Jakarta.  • The US Department of Justice and the European Union have agreed to speed up stalled data protection negotiations to reach a deal to protect the privacy of foreign nationals following recent surveillance disclosures. A joint statement issued by attorney general Eric Holder and European Commission vice-president Vivienne Reding released after bilateral talks in Washington on Monday said they hoped to reach ”a meaningful and comprehensive” agreement by the spring. Commission officials said the deal is expected to cover issues such as bulk collection of data by law enforcement agencies – which would be limited to specific purposes – as well as reduce data retention limits, and give EU citizens a right of judicial redress in the US if they suspect their personal data is being misused. Separate talks took place at between White House officials and EU commissioner Cecilia Malmström on the subject of US surveillance aimed at specific individuals by intelligence agencies. No details regarding either set of talks were made available by the US administration, and any change in US law would require separate approval by Congress, but European negotiators insisted there had been a hopeful change of attitude in Washington since their previous discussions in the summer. • Germany's interior minister has criticised the US National Security Agency for its silence in response to the allegations that American spies had hacked into chancellor Angela Merkel's phone. At a special session in the Bundestag on Monday, Hans-Peter Friedrich said that contradictory comments from US intelligence directors and a reluctance to speak plainly had given rise to "conspiracy theories". Merkel said the allegations had "tested" Germany's relationship with the US and affected negotiations over a transatlantic free trade agreement. "The charges are grave and have to be cleared up." The chancellor did not comment specifically about the hacking of her phone. Parliamentarians used the opportunity not only to vent their anger over the NSA, but also at Merkel's lethargic response to the scandal. Gregor Gysi, chairman of Die Linke, said the government had allowed itself to be "lulled to sleep" by the NSA's assurances, while failing to get clear answers. http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/18/germany-nsa-angela-merkel-hacking • Yahoo will add encryption to all its products by spring 2014, chief Marissa Mayer has announced, in a bid to tackle users’ privacy fears in the wake of reports that the National Security Agency had accessed the tech firm's data centres. In a blogpost on Monday, Mayer said: There is nothing more important to us than protecting our users’ privacy.