The prime minister is under increasing pressure to mend the growing diplomatic rift with Indonesia caused by revelations by Guardian Australia and the ABC that Australia sought to spy on Indonesian president Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, his wife and his inner circle in 2009. The opposition leader, Bill Shorten, the former Labor foreign minister Bob Carr and a former Australian ambassador to Indonesia, John McCarthy, have urged Tony Abbott to act to calm the row and end the diplomatic stand-off. In an article written for Guardian Australia, Shorten reiterated his sense of urgency, saying: "The days ahead are of the utmost importance. Disagreement should not be allowed to fester. "The government needs to quickly and effectively remediate the situation. I can assure the Australian people that the opposition will fully co-operate in the task before Australia. We are willing to join the Abbott government in any effort, briefings or discussions in pursuit of the task of rebuilding trust within this key relationship." Indonesia has categorically rejected the prime minister's statement to parliament on Tuesday in which he said he "regretted" embarrassment caused by media reports but saw no reason for Australia to either explain or apologise for the surveillance. McCarthy, who was ambassador from 1997 to 2001 and who has in recent years chaired an Australia-Indonesia leadership dialogue, said he understood Abbott's position that he would not apologise, because that implicitly confirmed the spying had taken place. But he said it was crucial for Abbott to make personal contact with Yudhoyono to calm the dispute. "There is nothing, frankly, to prevent the prime minister saying to the president that it's not happening and it's not going to happen in the future. That's what Obama did with Angela Merkel and I don't see a problem with that," he told the ABC, referring to President Barack Obama's pledge to the German chancellor after a similar spying revelation, also from documents leaked by whistleblower Edward Snowden. "Personal contact is crucial at this stage. You have to deal with it by getting on the front foot, by contacting the Indonesian president and saying this is not going to continue to happen. The fact that you take the initiative shows you are contrite to some degree," McCarthy said. "It can't be allowed just to fester. If it festers it will get worse and it will be much harder to deal with, particularly as the politics get hotter in Indonesia". Speaking to Guardian Australia and the ABC at the presidential palace, Yudhoyono's foreign affairs spokesman, Teuku Faizasyah, described the Australian prime minister's decision to neither confirm nor deny the revelations as "not advisable". He said: "At the moment, what we are requesting is very clear. The earlier the clarification that we receive, that will clear the air. It's not advisable to maintain the status quo of not confirm[ing] nor deny[ing] if there is any tapping incident in the past. "At stake is the strategic relations that we've already established." Indonesia's police chief, General Sutarman, also told Fairfax media that he was preparing to halt all joint programs, including those addressing trans-national crime, people smuggling, trafficking in persons and terrorism if the president ordered it in response to phone tapping revelations. In a statement to parliament on Tuesday, Shorten said he believed Abbott should act so the issue did not become "a running sore" in the crucial bilateral relationship, also citing the Obama pledge to Merkel as an example of how to handle it. "We should not allow these matters to fester for very long at all. We should not allow this matter to taint our relationship going forward, and we encourage the government to redouble its efforts to ensure that this is not the case. We in the opposition do not underestimate the seriousness of this issue. The most important thing is that Tony Abbott doesn't allow this to become a running sore," he said. The manager of opposition business, Tony Burke, said on Wednesday that "at the moment, Tony Abbott seems to be risking everything on the bet that Indonesia will not escalate the situation". Bob Carr, Labor's foreign minister from 2012, has said the government must apologise for the spying and "carve out what is off limits" for intelligence gathering in future. Carr said the revelations were "nothing short of catastrophic" for the bilateral relationship and that Abbott's response to date had been "too dismissive by far". The leader of the Greens, senator Christine Milne, called on Abbott to "pick up the phone" to try to calm down the row, saying he could promise that "henceforth this won't happen". "Everyone knows if there is a level of tension at a personal level ... the best way to fix it is at a personal level," she said. But former Howard government foreign minister Alexander Downer said he believed Abbott's refusal to comment on intelligence matters was the right course, and that Australia was best advised to stand firm and let the furore blow over. Former Australian ambassador to China Ross Garnaut said Australia may need to follow the American example and apologise. "We will need to go out of our way to reassure them that we do treat Indonesia and its leaders with respect," he said. In parliament on Tuesday, Abbott said: "In the past 24 hours there have been calls for Australia to detail our intelligence operations and to apologise for them. "The first duty of every government is to protect the country and to advance its national interests, that is why every government gathers information and why every government knows that every other government gathers information … there is no greater responsibility for a prime minister than ensuring the safety of Australian citizens and the security of our borders, and that indeed is why we do collect intelligence. "National security requires a consistent determination to do what is best for Australia and that is why this government will support the national security decisions of previous ones as we will expect future governments to respect ours. "Australia should not be expected to apologise for the steps we take to protect our country now or in the past, any more than other governments should be expected to apologise for the similar steps that they have taken ... importantly in Australia's case we use all our resources including information to help our friends and allies, not to harm them. "Similarly ... Australia shouldn't be expected to detail what we do to protect our country any more than other governments should be expected to detail what they do to protect theirs. Others should ask of us no more than what they are prepared to do themselves," Abbott said. "I don't believe Australia should be expected to apologise for reasonable intelligence-gathering activities."