Indonesia has temporarily halted all co-operation with Australia on people smuggling, its president, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, announced on Wednesday as he continued to demand an explanation from the Australian government for the phone tapping revelations. In a dramatic escalation of the row between the two countries, Yudhoyono spelled out a series of measures, including suspending all joint military exercises, in response to the scandal sparked by documents published by Guardian Australia and the Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Speaking at the presidential palace, Yudhoyono said such phone tapping was “in violation of international law”, saying: “I don't understand why it had to happen. Why Australia did it to Indonesia.” He added: “I am expecting an official statement and stance from the Australian government.” Yudhoyono said he would be writing to the Australian prime minister, Tony Abbott, on Wednesday demanding an official explanation. Abbott promised to reply “swiftly, fully and courteously” to Yudhoyono’s letter, in a statement to parliament on Wednesday night. The prime minister said he had been “encouraged by the president’s remarks about the strength of the relationship” and again expressed “deep and sincere regret about the embarrassment to the president and Indonesia caused by recent media reporting”. The rift between the two countries opened up after reports from the Guardian and the ABC on Monday that Australia's spy agencies had attempted to listen in on the personal phone calls of Yudhoyono, and targeted the mobile phones of his wife, senior ministers and confidants. The reports revealed top-secret documents, dated November 2009, from the whistleblower Edward Snowden, a former contractor to the US's National Security Agency. In response to Abbott’s parliamentary statement, the opposition leader, Bill Shorten, said it was a “team Australia” moment and the Labor party would support the government’s efforts to repair the bilateral relationship. Yudhoyono said a number of areas of co-operation would be reviewed, including temporary suspension of information-sharing deals, joint military training, and “co-ordinated military operations targeting people smuggling”. “We can't possibly continue with it when we're not sure that there isn't tapping on Indonesia national forces,” he said. Yudhoyono said all future co-operation between Australian and Indonesia should be conducted under a code of conduct that was “binding” and “clear in nature”. The ABC reports that Indonesia has now pulled out of a biannual joint airforce training exercise in the Northern Territory, which had started on Tuesday. Future training exercises have been put on hold. “I find it personally hard to comprehend why the tapping was done. We are not in a cold war era,” Yudhoyono said. He added that he was hopeful the “good” relationship between Australia and Indonesia would continue “after this problem is resolved”, also calling for calling for calm among Indonesians. "I know Indonesians are upset and angry on what Australia has done to Indonesia. But in international relations, in dealing with certain situations, we can not be emotional, we must remain rational,” he said. Before Yudhoyono’s statement, Indonesia’s chief of intelligence said Australian intelligence authorities had told him tapping had occurred between 2007 and 2009. Marciano Norman, head of the Indonesian State Intelligence agency, said the Australian security officials had reassured him that the phone tapping would stop. “According to my latest communication, starting from now they will stop – they won't do it anymore," he said. "If they conduct activities outside the existing information sharing co-ordination, then it is a violation and thus it is unacceptable." Marty Natalegawa, the Indonesian foreign minister, had said Indonesia was officially downgrading its relationship with Australia. He said the downgrade would “include reviewing all bilateral co-operation between the two countries – not only information and intelligence exchange”. “It's no longer business as usual,” he said. There was a police and security presence at the Australian embassy in Jakarta on Wednesday, with police officers telling Guardian Australia they were on standby for protests outside. There were no scheduled protests as of Wednesday afternoon.