10.05am GMT Welcome to our hub for all Edward Snowden, NSA and GCHQ-related developments around the world. As arguments rage over how much of our day to day life should be monitored in the name of security, we'll be tracking the growing global debate about privacy in the digital age. We'd like to know what you think about the whole NSA story, what you're worried about – and any new areas you'd like to read more about. Good morning. Here are today’s headlines. • Indonesia has temporarily halted all co-operation with Australia on people smuggling, its president, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, announced on Wednesday as he continued to demand an explanation from the Australian government for the phone tapping revelations, write Oliver Laughland in Jakarta and Lenore Taylor in Canberra. In a dramatic escalation of the row between the two countries, Yudhoyono spelled out a series of measures, including suspending all joint military exercises, in response to the scandal sparked by documents published by Guardian Australia and the Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Speaking at the presidential palace, Yudhoyono said such phone tapping was “in violation of international law”, saying: “I don't understand why it had to happen. Why Australia did it to Indonesia.” He added: “I am expecting an official statement and stance from the Australian government.” Yudhoyono said he would be writing to the Australian prime minister, Tony Abbott, on Wednesday demanding an official explanation. Abbott promised to reply “swiftly, fully and courteously” to Yudhoyono’s letter, in a statement to parliament on Wednesday night. • Italian premier Enrico Letta has told his parliament that no communications by Italy's political leaders or its embassies worldwide were compromised by the US National Security Agency's surveillance work, the Associated Press reports. Letta reported to lawmakers Wednesday on the results of intelligence checks and international queries. He also said there is no evidence that the privacy of ordinary Italians was violated by Italian or foreign intelligence activity, and that US authorities have assured him that intelligence gathering has not been "systematically" used against Italy. Letta had previously given similar assurances to a closed-door briefing to a parliamentary commission. • The world now faces total electronic penetration, with huge power available to those who control it, argues Simon Jenkins. The idea that the assurances of a policeman or spy are "good enough for me" has been shown as deluded. No group should be trusted with such unconstrained leverage over others, least of all one revealed as systematically deceiving Congress.Expecting the west's arcane democratic institutions to police the new digital power of states is to build a sandcastle against a tank. Yet they are all we have. Parliamentarians who discover they have been deceived by the spies must howl blue murder, as they are doing in America but not in Britain … The press, showered with leaks, must resort to its own educated judgment in deciding where the public interest lies. Everyone knows secrets must be kept, but keeping them needs a framework built on public trust. That framework must be informed and argued. It can no longer rely on the bark of command and a cringing deference to the gods of security. • Advances in technology have given undemocratic countries unparalleled opportunities to buy powerful off-the-shelf systems for spying on people, the head of a committee of MPs has warned. I'll have all the latest development in the NSA/Snowden controversies here throughout the day.