8.55am AEST Good morning news hounds, We woke to Indonesia piling the pressure on the Abbott government to please explain the activities of its intelligence agencies in 2009 - ironically under the Rudd reign - when said agencies allegedly bugged the Indonesian president and his wife, among others. President SBY hit national television, after a foray on Twitter, to express his displeasure and suspend cooperation on military training and people smuggling. As Australians sat down to their steak and three veg, Tony Abbott answered SBY, with the following statement to the Australian Parliament. Madam Speaker, a short time ago, President Yudhoyono made a statement in Jakarta. I have to say that I was encouraged by the President’s remarks about the strength of the relationship between Australia and Indonesia, although obviously there are very serious issues which do need to be worked through in the near future between us. Again, Madam Speaker, I want to express here in this Chamber my deep and sincere regret about the embarrassment to the President and to Indonesia that’s been caused by recent media reporting. The President indicated that he would shortly be writing to me. I’d like to reassure the House that I will be responding to the President’s letter swiftly, fully and courteously. As always, I am absolutely committed to building the closest possible relationship with Indonesia because that is overwhelmingly in the interests of both our countries. Bill Shorten's statement, which I will bring you shortly, suggested it was not a time for politics but rather a moment for "Team Australia". So it was a little surprising when the first person on the doors at Parliament was Labor's foreign spokesperson, Tanya Plibersek, who said she supported any steps the government was taking to restore normal relations with Indonesia. But Plibersek also said the Abbott government relationship with Indonesia effectively got off to a rocky start with policies like boat buy backs and turn backs. The Coalition, she said, had been making comments about:  doing things in Indonesian waters and on their soil without talking to them.  Plibersek also suggested Tony Abbott "offended the entire Indonesian press corps" on his first visit to the country. She was, however, less forthright when asked a question about the fact that the spying allegations occurred under Labor's watch. We never comment on matters of security and intelligence. Meanwhile, in the northern hemisphere, foreign minister Julie Bishop, rugged up in Washington for the Ausmin talks, says she has had a "fruitful day" with John Kerry and Chuck Hagel where they all "reaffirmed the commitment to the (US-Aus) alliance and bilateral cooperation. They talked about the disaster relief efforts in the Philippines and a whole range of issues which may or may not have included the spying allegations but which certainly did include the topic of diplomatic relations between Australia and its Asian neighbours.  For a full round up of where the Australian-Indonesian relationship is at, check out Lenore Taylor and Oliver Laughland's story here. Updated at 10.01am AEST