10.31am GMT Welcome to our hub for all Edward Snowden, NSA and GCHQ-related developments around the world. As arguments rage over how much of our day to day life should be monitored in the name of security, we'll be tracking the growing global debate about privacy in the digital age. We'd like to know what you think about the whole NSA story, what you're worried about – and any new areas you'd like to read more about. Good morning. Last night the Guardian and Channel 4 News revealed that the phone, internet and email records of UK citizens not suspected of any wrongdoing have been analysed and stored by America's National Security Agency under a secret deal that was approved by British intelligence officials, according to documents from the whistleblower Edward Snowden. In addition, a draft memo, marked top-secret and dated from 2005, reveals a proposed NSA procedure for spying on the citizens of the UK and other Five-Eyes nations, even where the partner government has explicitly denied the US permission to do so. The memo makes clear that partner countries must not be informed about this surveillance, or even the procedure itself. You can read the Guardian’s report full here and watch the Channel 4 News report here. Channel 4 News report: Documents show Blair government let US spy on Britons http://t.co/f2RVGP1RVY— Paul Owen (@PaulTOwen) November 20, 2013 • This morning Nick Clegg, the British deputy prime minister, was asked about the revelations. He said it was right to examine the accountability of the security services and the proportionality of their use of new technologies. But he refused to be drawn on the specifics of the Guardian's revelation that the US was spying on UK citizens without Britain's knowledge, saying he was "not going to comment on one article that has appeared this morning in the newspapers". Pressed on the issue, he said Barack Obama was holding a review into the US National Security Agency's powers and there were also reviews going on in Britain. Here’s how I reported it this morning on the politics blog. Clegg says the security agencies are run by very, very diligent people who take their duty to keep us safe very seriously. They work within the law. But the technologies now used by the agencies are far more powerful and can store and analyse data on a scale we've never known before, he says. This was "unimaginable" even a few years ago. So it is right to ask about the proportionality of intelligence gathering today and the accountability of the services. What about the decision the US took to spy on UK citizens? Clegg says he is "not going to comment on one article that has appeared this morning in the newspapers". He says the system of oversight is "quite an obscure process to the public". He says there is a legitimate question to ask: "How do you make sure you have proper accountability, proper proportionality" of the use of these technologies? The listener says he has not answered the specific question about the US secretly spying on UK citizens. Clegg says Obama is having a review. But what is the UK doing, Ferrari asks. Clegg says there are reviews here too, for example by the intelligence and security committee. You could have "different kinds of inquiries and reviews", he says. • Meanwhile, in Indonesia, around 150 uniformed protesters from several nationalist groups converged outside the Australian embassy in Jakarta, burning paper printouts of Australian flags and chanting “Australia, go to hell”, following Guardian and Australian Broadcasting Corporation revelations about Australian attempts to tap the phone of the Indonesian president, reports Oliver Laughland in Jakarta. In a press release, the protesters demanded an official apology from Tony Abbott over the phone-tapping revelations. They said the Australian ambassador should be expelled and threatened to intimidate Australian citizens in Indonesia if the apology was not offered. Members of the fringe groups, including the Red and White Brigade, a nationalist youth group, and FKPPI, another small nationalist group, painted graffiti on the walls and pavement of the Australian embassy, with the driveway outside the building now adorned with the words “Mr Abbott is stupid”. The groups, dressed in camouflage and berets, numbered far fewer than predicted. A security advisory memo seen by Guardian Australia indicated up to 750 people would attend and also said 10 other protests were planned around Jakarta. The protest was attended by Indonesian Democrat MP Ruhut Sitompul, who called for the Australian ambassador, Greg Moriarty, to be expelled. “Doesn't he feel ashamed?” Sitompul said. “The ambassador should be replaced and if it’s needed we should deport him, send him back to Australia." Abbott has promised Indonesia a full and courteous response. • A new Washington Post-ABC News poll shows Americans increasingly believe Edward Snowden’s revelations have damaged US national security, even as the programmes have provoked privacy concerns. Six in 10 Americans — 60 percent — say Snowden’s actions harmed U.S. security, increasing 11 percentage points from July after a cascade of news reports based on his disclosures detailed the National Security Agency’s expansive web of telephone and Internet surveillance efforts … More than half of poll respondents — 52 percent — say he should be charged with a crime, nearly identical to a July Post-ABC survey. And 55 percent say he was wrong to expose the NSA’s intelligence-gathering efforts. But “a majority now say surveillance programs intrude on their personal privacy rights, and more than two-thirds think they intrude on at least some Americans’ privacy. Nearly half also say that surveillance violates the rights of foreign citizens and governments”, the paper reports. Forty-six percent say the agency “goes too far” in its surveillance activities, but just as many say its programs are “about right” (37 percent) or don’t go far enough (10 percent) … Most poll respondents think the NSA’s surveillance program intrudes on some Americans’ privacy rights — 68 percent say this — while 54 percent see intrusions on their own privacy, 49 percent count foreign governments as victims and 48 percent say this of foreign citizens. I'll have all the latest developments here throughout the day.