2.10pm GMT • Downing Street has played down - but refused to deny outright - reports saying that David Cameron has told colleagues he wants to "get rid of all this green crap". A spokesman said Number 10 did not recognise the phrase and, taking part in a photocall, Cameron insisted that he was still committed to the environmental agenda. Nick Clegg told LBC that the phrase was not "a fair reflection of [Cameron's] views". • Labour has accused the Tories and the Lib Dems of trying to "smear" the party over its association with Paul Flowers, the disgraced former Co-op Bank chairman. Ed Miliband said that Labour had behaved entirely properly. What this episode says is more about the character of the prime minister than the character of Labour's relationship with the Co-op. We have a prime minister, who when he says a serious situation at a bank tries to make cheap political points rather than sorting out that serious situation, and frankly David Cameron is determined to smear his way to the next 18 months. That's wrong, and that's not what the British people expect from the prime minister. "As soon as I knew about Reverend Flowers' activities, he was suspended from the Labour party, and now what needs to happen is there does need to be a look at the regulatory issues around the regulation of the Co-op and around Reverend Flowers' role in that. But I think what the British people have a right to expect from the prime minister is not just to engage in smear, unjustified smears, but actually to concentrate on helping the borrowers, the savers, the investors, in this important institution. And Ed Balls said that for Nick Clegg to suggest that Flowers had donated £50,000 to Balls was a lie. To allege and smear that I have received £50,000 from Paul Flowers, it’s a lie, and I hope [Clegg] will withdraw that ... Nick Clegg and George Osborne and David Cameron say I’ve got the questions to answer. They’re the government, they’ve been there for three years, they have advocated Paul Flowers buying 600 Lloyds branches. Were they asleep? Did they not know what was going on? They’re the regulators, they’re in charge and they’ve not been doing their job. Balls also said that he had had never had a meeting with Flowers. You would believe from looking at David Cameron and the Daily Mail that I met him regularly. I've never ever had a meeting with him ever, or an email or a phone call. Mark Hoban, the Treasury minister, has had 30 meetings with him. I've never had a meeting with him. I've been at a dinner he was at, I was at a reception he was at, he was the chair of a bank, but the idea that Ed [Miliband] or I knew what was going on - we weren't the regulator, we weren't the chancellor, we weren't in charge and where were these guys? Why was George Osborne asleep on his watch? • Nick Clegg has hinted at the need for a wider inquiry into the "unimaginable" power of spying technology as US whistleblower Edward Snowden's leaks are chipping away at public support for the intelligence agencies. • George Osborne has received a boost as he puts the finishing touches to his autumn statement, as official figures showed stronger tax receipts from the gathering pace of the economic recovery are helping to boost the public finances. • Tim Yeo, the Conservative MP, has been cleared of abusing his position as chair of the Commons energy committee. • Ed Balls has said that Labour would  launch the biggest programme of new town construction in decades. He made the commitment in a speech. If we are to meet that target of at least 200,000 new homes a year by the end of the next parliament, while protecting communities, preserving valuable green belt land, avoiding haphazard urban sprawl and encouraging quality housing in sustainable communities , then every community will need to play its part and plan for the next generation. But we are also clear that we cannot deliver this ambition unless we build new towns.  Our priority will be to create ways in which a local authority or groups of authorities are incentivised to come forward to identify locations capable of sustaining large scale sites for New Towns and Garden Cities. With the Lyons Commission we will examine whether and how to give new town development corporations the right to: keep increased revenue from business rates as a revenue stream to finance investment - and to use the increased value of land to generate further capital for investment; acquire and assemble land; and plan and develop the infrastructure needed, bringing together the agencies and utilities who will need to participate in that process to deliver it. We should draw on the lessons from the past of how the New Towns were developed after the Second World War by Development Corporations, which had the powers to acquire, own, manage and dispose of land and property; undertake building operation; provide public utilities; and do anything else necessary to develop the New Town. • Carwyn Jones, the first minister of Wales, has warned that the Welsh government would probably try to block plans by Alex Salmond for a new sterling currency union if Scotland voted for independence. • The Local Government Association has said England's communities are being "short-changed" by £4.1bn a year under the model used to allocate central government funding across the UK. • Labour council leaders have visited Number 10 to lobby in favour of HS2. Great to see Labour city leaders backing #HS2. A high speed North-South railway is vital for our country's future. pic.twitter.com/69qU8dpe2X— David Cameron (@David_Cameron) November 21, 2013 • Kris Hopkins, the housing minister, has welcomed figures showing that the last three months have seen fastest rate of housebuilding since the crash in 2008. But Emma Reynolds, his Labour shadow said the number of affordable homes built in England was 26% lower in 2012-13 (42,830) than in 2011-12 (58,100). She said: David Cameron is presiding over the lowest levels of house building in peacetime since the 1920s. Home ownership remains out of reach of low and middle-income earners, rents ARE rising faster than wages and waiting lists GROW ever longer. Affordable housing figures Photograph: /Department for Communities Updated at 3.20pm GMT