Indonesia has given its phone companies a week to investigate whether they helped Australian spies tap president Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono's mobile phone. The development came as prime minister Tony Abbott prepared his response to a letter from the Indonesian president seeking an apology and a full explanation as to why Australian spies targeted his mobile phone, as well as those of his wife and some of his closest confidants, in 2009. Indonesia's communications minister Tifatul Sembiring has asked the chiefs of his country's 10 telcos to undertake internal investigations. The companies potentially face charges under Indonesia's information and electronic transactions law. Under Indonesian law only five bodies, including the national police, state intelligence agency and anti-corruption commission, are legally allowed to intercept communications. Having pledged to respond "swiftly, fully and courteously", Abbott met with the national security committee of cabinet on Thursday night to consider the matter. Indonesia's former intelligence chief says the diplomatic row with Australia can be resolved with an apology from Abbott. "Just apologise and ... forgive and forget," Abdullah Mahmud Hendropriyono told the ABC. Hendropriyono admitted in a 2004 television interview that Jakarta had spied on Australia. Former prime minister Julia Gillard said US president Barack Obama's approach to German chancellor Angela Merkel over a similar bugging scandal set the benchmark. "If he [Obama] had been aware he wouldn't have authorised it, and he could certainly say for the future that it wouldn't happen again," she told CNN. "I think that that's an appropriate response from Australia to Indonesia at this very difficult time." Protesters burned flags and chanted anti-Australian slogans outside the Indonesian embassy in Jakarta on Thursday. Co-operation on tackling people smuggling and the sharing of intelligence and military exercises have already been halted. Indonesia's trade minister Gita Wirjawan has warned his country may suspend talks on a comprehensive economic partnership agreement with Australia. The phone-tapping activities by Australia's Defence Signals Directorate (now called the Australian Signals Directorate) four years ago was revealed in US National Security Agency documents leaked by whistleblower Edward Snowden. Former foreign minister Alexander Downer said Abbott should "extend a friendly hand to president Yudhoyono", but not confirm the bugging occurred. "If Tony Abbott were to say 'gee I'm sorry about that', that would reveal that in fact, the allegation was true," he told Sky News.