Since revelations were aired that Australia attempted to tap the phone of the Indonesian president, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, and targeted the phones of his wife and inner circle, relations between the two countries have been at boiling point. Yudhoyono and the Australian prime minister, Tony Abbott, are currently at a stalemate, with Abbott refusing to apologise and Yudhoyono withdrawing his ambassador to Australia, downgrading the relationship between the two countries and withdrawing co-operation on people smuggling operations. This is how the international press have covered the diplomatic row: Time Time took a bit of an abstract approach, labelling its piece on the tense times with Indonesia, “So awk”. It focused on Liberal pollster Mark Textor’s foray by tweet into the diplomatic crisis in which he compared someone – he said no one; others thought it was the Indonesian foreign minister, Marty Natalegawa – to a 70s “Pilipino” porn star. The mystery target was said to have “ethics to match”. “Textor has yet to clarify what it is about Natalegawa’s appearance that is intrinsically Filipino as opposed to Indonesian, or how a porn star’s ethics are better or worse than a politician’s,” Time said of the fumble. New York Times With a headline that read, “NSA spying scandal tarnishes relations between Indonesia and Australia” the New York Times was not terribly sunny about the relationship with our closest neighbour. Relations had reached a “new low”, the Times thought, although it noted it was not the first time we had clashed. The Times was also puzzled that relations with the US did not seem to have been affected, as the documents that revealed the phone-tapping attempt came from former US intelligence agency contractor Edward Snowden. “Arguably Indonesia’s most important bilateral relationship and security partner, Australia is a familiar target of Indonesia’s anger,” the article said. “Yet Mr Natalegawa curiously ignored the role of the United States, making no mention of the status of Indonesia’s ambassador to Washington. ‘It has not been a very good day for the Indonesia-Australia relationship,’ Mr Natalegawa said.” The Independent The British newspaper was not kind in its assessment of Tony Abbott’s handling of relations with Indonesia, saying he had already “strained” the relationship by making promises on asylum seeker boat policy before the election without consulting Jakarta. “Mr Abbott was not even opposition leader in 2009 when, according to documents leaked by the US whistleblower Edward Snowden, Australia mounted the intelligence-gathering operation. But his handling of the diplomatic spat has reinforced perceptions of him as a foreign policy lightweight, producing gaffe after gaffe on the world stage,” the Independent said. The Diplomat Asia-Pacific publication the Diplomat speculated on whether Indonesia would rip up the defence treaty it has with Australia. The Lombok Treaty lists areas of co-operation, such as law enforcement co-operation against the smuggling of people, drugs, and arms; intelligence-sharing; and counter-terrorism. The Diplomat noted that relations had been progressing steadily since 2006 and had not faced this type of low since the 1999 East Timor crisis. “One could certainly make the argument that Australia’s alleged use of wiretapping was in violation of the agreement. It’s possible that Indonesia could once again formally abrogate its security treaty with Australia, which would have huge repercussions for the security environment in the Asia-Pacific,” the Diplomat said.