10.47am GMT Welcome to our hub for all Edward Snowden, NSA and GCHQ-related developments around the world. As arguments rage over how much of our day to day life should be monitored in the name of security, we'll be tracking the growing global debate about privacy in the digital age. We'd like to know what you think about the whole NSA story, what you're worried about – and any new areas you'd like to read more about. Good morning. Here are today’s headlines: • The watchdog tasked with scrutinising the work of Britain's intelligence agencies is to demand an urgent report from GCHQ about revelations that the phone, internet and email records of British citizens have been analysed and stored by America's National Security Agency, report Nick Hopkins and Matthew Taylor. Sir Malcolm Rifkind, the chair of the parliamentary intelligence and security committee, told the Guardian he would be seeking an explanation of a secret deal that appeared to allow the NSA to "unmask" personal data about Britons not suspected of any wrongdoing. This material had always been off-limits because the US and UK are the two main partners in an intelligence-sharing alliance – and the governments had agreed not to spy on each other's citizens. But that code of conduct changed fundamentally in 2007, with the approval of British intelligence officials, according to documents from the whistleblower Edward Snowden. Rifkind, whose committee is under tremendous pressure to prove it can credibly keep tabs on UK's spy agencies, said on Thursday: "As with any significant stories concerning any of the intelligence agencies, we will require and receive a full report from them on this." • The US, UK and their close intelligence partners have largely failed in their efforts to water down a United Nations draft resolution expressing deep concern about “unlawful or arbitrary” surveillance and calling for protection for the privacy of citizens worldwide, report Ewen MacAskill and James Ball in New York. Read the full UN draft resolution here. • Big investors in America's two largest mobile phone companies have demanded they disclose how much customer data they hand over to the US and foreign governments, reports Juliette Garside. Documents from the NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden show AT&T and Verizon have installed equipment to copy, scan and filter large amounts of the traffic that passes through their networks. • The UK and US must do more to protect internet users' privacy, the inventor of the world wide web, Sir Tim Berners-Lee, has warned as a survey of online freedoms is released, Charles Arthur reports. • In Australia, former prime minister Julia Gillard has suggested Tony Abbott follow the example of US president Barack Obama and provide Indonesia with an explanation of spying allegations. But she stopped short of saying the prime minister should apologise for the actions of Australia's electronic spy agency in 2009 – when she was deputy prime minister under Labor’s Kevin Rudd. And Malcolm Fraser, Liberal PM from 1975 to 1983, has said the Australian government should call for a review of its surveillance services to re-establish trust with Indonesia. • Indonesia has given its phone companies a week to investigate whether they helped Australian spies tap president Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono's mobile phone. And immigration minister Scott Morrison has sought to downplay the effect of Indonesia’s halt on co-operations with Australia to combat people smuggling. I'll cover any developments live here throughout the day.