The Guardian US today announced a three-year partnership with SC Johnson to showcase how reinstating values at the heart of business practices can create a positive impact on society. The innovative collaboration will fund editorially independent journalism at the Guardian US designed to create awareness and foster dialogue around sustainability and values-led businesses. SC Johnson, a private, family company with a long-standing commitment to people and the planet, is uniquely positioned to bring perspective and thought leadership to the topic of values led business, and to the heart of the corporate sustainability debate. It is one of the first major partnerships for the Guardian US and will be driven out of Guardian Labs, the Guardian's forthcoming global commercial proposition focused on innovative client collaboration and cross-media partnerships. In September, the Guardian announced the appointment of Anna Watkins as managing director of Guardian Labs. The partnership unlocks new funding for independent journalism examining sustainability, values-led businesses, and the idea that there are business models that go beyond fiduciary duty to create a positive impact in society. In addition, the partnership will enable co-created, sponsored content and events, utilizing the Guardian's multimedia expertise and leveraging its open approach to journalism. SC Johnson will share its expertise in this space, contributing based on its experience with topics like renewable energy, waste reduction and Base of the Pyramid programs. "This type of partnership gives us the resources to create quality independent journalism that is focused on the sustainability challenges faced by society," said Jo Confino, Executive Editor of the Guardian. "Business has been distorted by an obsession with short-termism and profit maximization at any cost. The partnership with SC Johnson will give us the opportunity to showcase those businesses that are able to integrate the three pillars of sustainable development; social, environmental and economic." "As a 127-year old family company, SC Johnson is committed to the greater good, and because we're privately held, we can make decisions for the long term versus the next quarter's earnings." said Kelly M. Semrau, Chief Sustainability Officer of SC Johnson. "We're so pleased to partner with the Guardian, an organization that shares our commitment to people and the planet, and to help generate awareness and discussion that will advance the sustainability agenda." About the Guardian Guardian News & Media (GNM) publishes theguardian.com, the third largest English-speaking newspaper website in the world. Since launching its US and Australia digital editions in 2011 and 2013 respectively, traffic from outside of the UK now represents over two-thirds of the Guardian's total digital audience. The Guardian US, with its digital-only newsroom in New York, covers US news for an online, global audience, merging the innovation and energy of a start-up with the groundbreaking, award-winning journalism and backing of the Guardian brand. The Guardian, which was first published in 1821, is most recently renowned for its trailblazing partnership with WikiLeaks in 2010, its globally acclaimed investigation into phone hacking and the launch of its groundbreaking digital-first strategy in 2011, and its agenda-setting NSA and GCHQ revelations following disclosures by whistleblower Edward Snowden. About SC Johnson SC Johnson is a family company dedicated to innovative, high-quality products, excellence in the workplace and a long-term commitment to the environment and the communities in which it operates. Based in the USA, the company is one of the world's leading manufacturers of household cleaning products and products for home storage, air care, pest control and shoe care. It markets such well-known brands as GLADE®, KIWI®, OFF!®, PLEDGE®, RAID®, SCRUBBING BUBBLES®, SHOUT®, WINDEX® and ZIPLOC® in the U.S. and beyond, with brands marketed outside the U.S. including AUTAN®, TANA®, BAMA®, BAYGON®, BRISE®, KABIKILLER®, KLEAR®, MR MUSCLE®, and RIDSECT®. The 127-year-old company, that generates $9 billion in sales, employs nearly 13,000 people globally and sells products in virtually every country around the world. www.scjohnson.com For further information please contact: Gennady Kolker: The Guardian, New York +1.646.937.5878 / +1.925.437.4522 Gennady.Kolker@theguardian.com Jessica Morris / Mike Harris: Fishburn Hedges, New York Jessica.Morris@fishburn-hedges.com / +1.212.459.6232 Mike.Harris@fishburn-hedges.com / +1.212.459.5738 Jam Stewart: SC Johnson +1.262.260.2440 JMStewar@scj.com