10.39am GMT Welcome to our hub for all Edward Snowden, NSA and GCHQ-related developments around the world. As arguments rage over how much of our day to day life should be monitored in the name of security, we'll be tracking the growing global debate about privacy in the digital age. We'd like to know what you think about the whole NSA story, what you're worried about – and any new areas you'd like to read more about. Good morning. Here are the headlines: • Indonesia is bolstering its intelligence capabilities in the wake of the phone tapping revelations, as the Australian prime minister, Tony Abbott, awaits a reply from Jakarta after sending a letter to the Indonesian president, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, on Sunday, reports Oliver Laughland. Last Monday, Guardian Australia and the Australian Broadcasting Corporation revealed that Australian spy agencies had targeted the personal mobile phones of Yudhoyono, his wife and eight other senior ministers in 2009. The revelations have caused a diplomatic storm between Australia and Indonesia, with Yudhoyono suspending all military cooperation, intelligence sharing and halting cooperation on people smuggling as he awaits a response from Canberra. Yudhoyono wrote to Abbott last week, after using a public address to call for clarity on the phone tapping. On Sunday, Abbott said he had responded to the letter but declined to give details of the response. Abbott’s decision not to offer a public apology has been criticised by many in Indonesia, including senior opposition politician and ex-intelligence chief Tubagus Hasanuddin who said he was "lacking in diplomacy skills". • The deputy director of the National Security Agency on Friday sounded sceptical about permitting the FBI, DEA or other law enforcement agencies to directly search through the NSA's vast data troves, as a new bill would appear to permit, writes Spencer Ackerman in Philadelphia. A bill recently approved by the Senate intelligence committee on a 13-4 vote blesses the ability of law enforcement agencies to directly conduct "queries of data" from NSA databases of foreign-derived communications content "for law enforcement purposes". John C Inglis, the top civilian at the NSA, said he was unfamiliar with the proposed legislation during a late-afternoon dialogue at the University of Pennsylvania Law School – a forum that allowed for occasionally blunt questioning of a senior NSA official. "The FBI is a customer of mine," Inglis said in response to a question from the Guardian. "But I don't provide domestic intelligence for the FBI, I essentially provide foreign intelligence inside, something that might cross the seam, and give them a tip as to how to spend their precious domestic resources to prosecute terrorism, counterintelligence, things of that sort. "So I can imagine situations where I, on their behalf, am querying my databases, foreign intelligence databases, to inform those instruments of power. I'm not yet in a place where I understand how I might give them direct access to those databases for their authorities. That I think would be problematic." Spencer adds that “in the six months since the Guardian, the Washington Post and others began publishing material derived from provided by a former NSA contractor, Edward Snowden, Inglis' statement is the clearest yet that the FBI and other law enforcement agencies cannot search through the NSA's data troves directly”. • Twitter has announced a significant increase in its data security as it moves to protect users from attacks by the "apex predators" of the internet, reports Jemima Kiss. An internal team of security engineers has spent several months implementing "perfect forward secrecy", which adds an extra layer of security to the widely used https encryption deployed by banks online, by retailers and, increasingly, consumer web services … Documents released by Edward Snowden, a former contractor to the US National Security Agency, have shown that the agency and its affiliates are storing vast amounts of encrypted consumer data so that it can later attempt to decrypt it, either by accessing unencrypted data or by using specific court orders to force data owners to hand over the private SSL keys. But forward secrecy means data would still be secure, even if the agency obtained the keys to the encrypted data. • The US government “really blew it” because of its mass surveillance programmes, Facebook chief Mark Zuckerberg has said. The 29-year-old CEO – who has spoken out in similar terms before – said: They’re continuing to blow it in some ways and I hope they become more transparent. These things are always in balance, in terms of doing the right things and also being clear and telling people about what you’re doing. I'll cover all major developments live throughout the day here.