The minister for trade, Andrew Robb, has clarified a statement he made on ABC television on Wednesday morning confirming that Australia did, in fact, tap the phones of the Indonesian president and his wife. In a significant departure from the normal government formulation, which is declining to comment on intelligence matters, Robb spoke of the surveillance in 2009 as a matter of fact. “It is unfortunate that this tapping that took place some years ago has been made public,” Robb told the ABC. “But it’s there. It’s a fact of life. We’ve got to deal with it. The prime minister is seeking to deal with it effectively. “I do think we are making every attempt to show our deep regret for the actions that occurred a few years ago with regard to the president and his wife.” Material concerning the incident revealed by Guardian Australia has only recorded that an attempt was made to tap the phones of Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, his wife, and their inner circle in 2009. No-one in government or officialdom, apart from Robb on Wednesday morning, has confirmed that spying actually took place. Given the profound implications of his statement at a time when bilateral relations are extremely sensitive, Robb was forced to correct the record, and confirm that he in fact had no direct knowledge of the events he was referring to. “Comments reported today from an interview I gave (on Tuesday) for ABC’s Business Today program warrant immediate clarification,” the trade minister said. “In the comments reported, I was referring in a general sense to the matters that have been broadly reported in the media,” he said. “I am not privy to any specific details of intelligence matters. “I do not intend to comment further on intelligence matters, consistent with the longstanding position of governments of both persuasions.” Robb’s statement on the case, and the subsequent clarification, followed efforts over the past 24 hours in both Jakarta and Canberra to mend fences over the spying furore. The Indonesian president, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, has proposed a new code to regulate intelligence matters to be worked out by special envoys. The prime minister, Tony Abbott, in a preliminary response to that overture on Wednesday morning, flagged a new security round table and more intelligence sharing.