Top eight stories on MediaGuardian Mail Online to launch in Australia Daily Mail's website in partnership with ninemsn Stylist marks 200th issue with Miranda Hart and Nigella Lawson Free women's title is guest edited by BBC sitcom star, while TV chef 'reveals special 60s makeover' as its beauty director CBS suspends Lara Logan over faulty report Logan's 'leave of absence' coincides with the release of internal review listing damning series of failures behind the broadcast Alec Baldwin blames gay activists for pulling of show Actor, who reportedly called photographer a 'cocksucking fag', acknowledged he had to take some responsibility BBC 'to be replaced by Scottish broadcaster' SNP proposes Scottish Broadcasting Service as a joint venture with BBC, funded by country's share of licence fee income Robert Peston attacks Daily Mail for revealing wife's cancer BBC business editor calls for 'common decency on newspapers' amid criticism of Daily Mail for disclosing details of wife's illness Nigella Lawson took cocaine and other drugs every day for years, court told Former assistants accused of defrauding TV cook of £300,000 claim she kept 'guilty secret' from then husband Charles Saatchi, court told Rebekah Brooks spoke at Chequers party of phone hack methods, trial told Former editor and New International executive discussed issue at David Cameron's birthday party at Chequers, court hears Top comment on MediaGuardian BBC signs open data agreement Ami Sedghi: Corporation signals its willingness to collaborate with the Open Data Institute and three other non-profit bodies Today's headlines The Guardian Guardian crossword compiler Araucaria dies aged 92. P1,3, G2 P10-11 Nigella Lawson regularly took cocaine, court told. P3 Rebekah Brooks talked about phone hacking with guest at David Cameron's party, court hears. P11 Robert Peston attacks Daily Mail for revealing wife's cancer. P13 EU demands legal redress from US in fallout over Edward Snowden leaks. P18 Xbox owners say TV pictures unwatchable. P23 Obituary: Guardian crossword compiler Araucaria. P35 Family Guy's Brian the dog: obituary. G2 P2 Grimsby makes TV history with local TV launch. G2 P2 Daily Telegraph Nigella Lawson has cocaine habit, says Charles Saatchi. P1,3 Rebekah Brooks 'told David Cameron's birthday party guest how to hack phones'. P5 Guardian crossword compiler Araucaria dies aged 92. P10 Obituary: former Sunday Telegraph editor John Thompson. P35 Code of practice drawn up to make whistleblowing easier. Business P6 Financial Times Rebekah Brooks unsure Andy Coulson 'could survive', court told. P4 Pinterest hopes to bridge retail divide. P19 Vivendi confirms plan to split in two. P21 Carl Icahn extols activist investing as he sells stake in Grand Theft Auto developer. P21 Argos to replace catalogue with iPads. P23 Whistleblower protection law 'failing'. P23 The Times Court told Charles Saatchi said Nigella Lawson was 'off her head' on drugs. P1,3 Court told Rebekah Brooks raised phone hacking at Chequers party. P21 BBC announces Christmas TV lineup. P25 Daily Mail apologises to Robert Peston for reporting on his late wife's illness. P25 The ups and downs in the life of Nigella Lawson. T2 P4 Alexander Lebedev starts community service for punching business rival on TV. P39 Obituary: former editor of The Sunday Telegraph JWM Thompson. P58 The Independent Nigella Lawson regularly took cocaine, court told. P7 BBC Radio 1 and Radio 2 both playlist new One Direction single. P11 Robert Peston attacks Daily Mail for revealing wife's cancer. P18 Head of AEG Live quits. P53 i Fraud trial told TV chef Nigella Lawson 'took drugs daily'. P9 BBC's Robert Peston attacks the Daily Mail for reporting about his late wife. P10 Report says social media is 'encouraging children to smoke'. P21 Radio 2 embraces One Direction following the new 'mature' sound of their new album. P27 Wall Street Journal Europe Vivendi clears plan to spin off telecom unit. P18 Interview with Sony Entertainment chief executive Michael Lynton. P19 Rebekah Brooks allegedly discussed how to hack voicemails. P19 Daily Mail Nigella Lawson regularly took cocaine, court told. P1, P4, P5 Judge who heads Court of Protection calls for its hearings to be open to the press. P6 Channel 4 Plebgate documentary called into question by head of the Crown Prosectuion. P9 Rebecca Adlington too ill for I'm A Celebrity challenges. P12 Court told Rebekah Brooks 'talked of hacking' at PM party. P17 Broadcaster Selina Scott opens her first shop. P39 Daily Express Court hears Nigella Lawson was 'off her head' on cocaine for 10 years. P1, P2 I'm A Celebrity coverage. P11 Phone-hacking trial told Rebekah Brooks 'chatted about hacking at PM's party'. P17 Cilla Black returns for a special edition of Surprise Surprise. P27 The Sun Nigella Lawson regularly took cocaine, court hears. P1,4-5 Rebekah Brooks predicted Andy Coulson's resignation three months before it happened, court hears. P4 I'm a Celebrity coverage. P7 Channel 4 faces questions over whether Plebgate CCTV film was edited. P9 Sun cleared over Plebgate story. P9 Viewers confused over Christmas TV ads. P11 Elton John: we really want reality TV stars to be assassinated. TV Biz P1 Doctor Who Christmas special. TV Biz P2-3 Cilla Black returns in Surprise Surprise. TV Biz P3 Daily Mirror Court told Nigella Lawson used cocaine daily for 10 years. P1, P4, P5 Report says kids are being tempted to try electronic cigarettes via Facebook and Twitter. P6 Andy Murray favourite to win Sports Personality of the Year. P11 I'm a Celebrity coverage. P11 Actor Charlie Condou to leave Coronation Street. P11 Interview with Eastenders actress Kierston Wareing. P16 Soap veteran Stan Stennett dies aged 88. P27 Daily Star Court told Nigella Lawson was a secret cocaine user. P1, P4, P5 I'm a Celebrity coverage. P6, P7 Hacking trial told Rebekah Brooks revealed she knew how to hack phones at PM party. P10 Andy Murray favourite for BBC Sports Personality Of The Year award. P17 TV viewers love Christmas ads but quickly forget which store they are for. P18 BBC spent £40,000 last year to fund staff leaving parties. P27 Go to MediaGuardian