9.58am GMT Welcome to our hub for all Edward Snowden, NSA and GCHQ-related developments around the world. As arguments rage over how much of our day to day life should be monitored in the name of security, we'll be tracking the growing global debate about privacy in the digital age. We'd like to know what you think about the whole NSA story, what you're worried about – and any new areas you'd like to read more about. Good morning. Here are the headlines: • The EU executive is threatening to freeze crucial data-sharing arrangements with the US because of the Edward Snowden revelations about the mass surveillance of the National Security Agency. The US will have to adjust its surveillance activities to comply with EU law and enable legal redress in the US courts for Europeans whose rights may have been infringed, said Viviane Reding, the EU's justice and rights commissioner who is negotiating with the US on the fallout from the NSA scandal. • The Indonesian president, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, is said to be "disappointed" and "angry" that a letter sent to him by Tony Abbott did not contain an apology for the spying that targeted him and his inner circle. Last Monday, Guardian Australia and the Australian Broadcasting Corporation revealed that Australian spy agencies had targeted the personal mobile phones of Yudhoyono, his wife and eight other senior ministers in 2009. Abbott welcomed a roadmap from Yudhoyono to restore bilateral ties. • The Australian trade minister, Andrew Robb, confirmed that Canberra carried out such tapping, although he later rowed back, saying he was not privy to "any specific details of intelligence matters". Material concerning the incident revealed by Guardian Australia has only recorded that an attempt was made to tap the phones of Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, his wife, and their inner circle in 2009. • Guardian Media Group chairman Neil Berkett said he was comfortable the organisation did the right thing by publishing details of Australian spying on Indonesia. "I'm very comfortable that our editorial people followed appropriate processes," he told AAP in Brisbane. "The Guardian has a right in terms of its editorial position to explore what is in public interest. It was the editorial staffs' and the editor-in-chief's view that that was in the public interest." • The United Nations moved a step closer to calling for an end to excessive surveillance on Tuesday in a resolution that reaffirms the “human right to privacy” and calls for the UN’s human rights commissioner to conduct an inquiry into the impact of mass digital snooping. • Federal appeals judges in Washington will soon decide whether the public has the right to see secret Justice Department documents setting out the legality of surveillance practices – which powerful senators say amount to a body of secret law. • Microsoft is moving towards a major new effort to encrypt its internet traffic, the Washington Post reports. • The Post also has a good piece on the growing band of leakers and privacy activists finding a new home in Berlin – including filmmaker Laura Poitras, one of the journalists behind the Guardian’s original Snowden revelations, and Sarah Harrison, the WikiLeaks activist who accompanied Snowden to Moscow. Berlin. Photograph: Paul Owen • Official means of oversight of American and British spying have failed. So we are left with the protection of last resort: the conscience of the individual who will resist abuse of power or expose it once it is done, writes Jeff Jarvis, journalism professor at the City University of New York. • Confused about the NSA revelations? Do you wonder how the activities of GCHQ and the NSA affect you? Why have spies been monitoring Facebook, Gmail and Skype? And even if we are being watched online, how does that affect what we do? This animation, narrated by Jemima Kiss, explains what the disclosures mean for all of us • The New York Times has also put out a video attempting to explain why readers should care about the NSA revelations. I'll have live coverage of all developments here throughout the day. Updated at 11.44am GMT