11.37am GMT Welcome to our hub for all Edward Snowden, NSA and GCHQ-related developments around the world. As arguments rage over how much of our day to day life should be monitored in the name of security, we'll be tracking the growing global debate about privacy in the digital age. We'd like to know what you think about the whole NSA story, what you're worried about – and any new areas you'd like to read more about. Good morning. Here are the headlines: • Canada allowed the NSA to conduct widespread surveillance during the 2010 G8 and G20 summits, according to a Canadian Broadcasting Corporation report citing documents from former NSA contractor Edward Snowden. It was already known that the 2009 London G20 meetings were monitored, on that occasion by Britain’s GCHQ. CBC reports, in a story co-written by former Guardian journalist Glenn Greenwald: Top secret documents retrieved by U.S. whistleblower Edward Snowden show that Prime Minister Stephen Harper's government allowed the largest American spy agency to conduct widespread surveillance in Canada during the 2010 G8 and G20 summits. The documents are being reported exclusively by CBC News. The briefing notes, stamped "Top Secret," show the U.S. turned its Ottawa embassy into a security command post during a six-day spying operation by the National Security Agency while U.S. President Barack Obama and 25 other foreign heads of state were on Canadian soil in June of 2010. The covert U.S. operation was no secret to Canadian authorities. An NSA briefing note describes the American agency's operational plans at the Toronto summit meeting and notes they were "closely co-ordinated with the Canadian partner." • The Indonesian foreign minister, Marty Natalegawa, has signalled that the rebuilding of relations between Australia and Indonesia in the wake of the phone-tapping revelations is only at “step one” in a long process he hopes will result in the signing of a binding code of ethics between the two nations, report Oliver Laughland in Sydney and Karima Anjani in Jakarta. Speaking to reporters at a special parliamentary hearing in Jakarta over the phone-tapping revelations, Natalegawa confirmed he would contact the Australian foreign minister, Julie Bishop, following the president’s call for a new deal between the two countries to be forged in six steps. Last Monday, Guardian Australia and the Australian Broadcasting Corporation revealed that Australian spy agencies had targeted the personal mobile phones of Yudhoyono, his wife and eight other senior ministers in 2009. I’ll have live coverage of all developments here throughout the day. Updated at 9.45am GMT