Google's practice of combining personal data from its many different online services violates Dutch data protection law, the country's privacy watchdog said on Thursday after a seven-month investigation. The Dutch Data Protection Authority, or DPA, asked Google to attend a meeting to discuss its concerns, after which it would decide whether to take any action against the cloud services, internet search and advertising giant, which could include fines. Jacob Kohnstamm, chairman of the College for the Protection of Personal Data, said that Google's combining of data from different services, including surfing multiple websites, to tailor ads and personalize services like YouTube "spins an invisible web of our personal information, without our permission, and that is outlawed." The report said it was "almost impossible" for a Dutch internet user not to interact with Google "be it via Search, YouTube or Maps, or passively through third-party websites" and that "Google does not properly inform users which personal data the company collects and combines, and for what purposes." It also said that proper user permission "cannot be obtained by [their] accepting general (privacy) terms of service." Google, responding to the Dutch authority's findings, said it provided users of its services with sufficiently specific information about the way it processed their personal data. "Our privacy policy respects European law and allows us to create simpler, more effective services. We have engaged fully with the Dutch DPA throughout this process and will continue to do so going forward," the company said in a statement. The Dutch decision reflects concerns across Europe about the volume of personal data that is held in foreign jurisdictions in so-called "cloud" storage services, where data is stored remotely via the internet instead of on-site, giving individuals little control over their personal information. Six European nations are investigating Google's privacy policy - the Netherlands, France, Spain, Germany, Britain and Italy - though the fines regulators can typically impose are modest compared to the company's revenues and profits. Spain's Data Protection Agency said in June that it had initiated sanction proceedings, after initial investigations showed Google Spain and Google US may be committing six infractions against the country's data protection law. It said the company could also face fines of up to €300,000 ($408,000). By contrast, Google generates revenues of more than $545,000 every five minutes, according to its latest results. Privacy campaigners have also pointed to documents leaked by the former CIA technician and National Security Agency contractor Edward Snowden that suggest US intelligence services have access to material stored in US-based cloud services. In March 2012, Google unilaterally imposed new terms of service on users of all its cloud services, which include the YouTube video streaming site, the GMail email service, and the ubiquitous Google search engine. In France, the maximum fine is €300,000 ($408,000). In a previous Dutch case involving the gathering of data from Wi-fi networks, a spokeswoman for the agency said Google - which has a market capitalisation of over $350bn - could have been fined up to €1m if it had not subsequently complied.