Australia’s intelligence watchdog, the Inspector General of Intelligence and Security, says it maintains “ongoing visibility” of all activities undertaken by the Australian Signals Directorate as the federal attorney-general George Brandis, moved to discredit a new document from the whistleblower Edward Snowden. The IGIS on Monday declined to comment on a report from Guardian Australia detailing records from a 2008 meeting in which the ASD (then named the Defence Signals Directorate) discussed sharing "bulk, unminimised" metadata with foreign intelligence agencies. It is unclear what, if any, specific actions followed the 2008 meeting between the “5-Eyes” intelligence-sharing partners – the US, Britain, Canada, New Zealand and Australia. “The Inspector-General does not comment on any particular intelligence matter and is not commenting on any aspect of the material that was in the media today,” the organisation said in a statement sent to Guardian Australia on Monday. But the statement said the IGIS maintained “ongoing visibility of all of ASD’s activities. They (IGIS staff) are briefed on sensitive operations and receive intelligence product. IGIS staff have access to ASD’s systems and records and undertake regular inspections of a range of ASD activities.” “Our particular focus is on how ASD protects the privacy of Australians but we also have regard to the legality and propriety of other ASD activities and whether the activities are consistent with human rights,” it said. The IGIS said the AGS was required to secure prior authorisation from ministers for certain activities “including any activity to produce intelligence on an Australian person” and each of these submissions was reviewed by IGIS staff. “ASD can only cooperate with an authority of another country to the extent authorised by the minister for defence. The exchange of information with foreign authorities is reviewed by IGIS staff to ensure that it is within the limits of this authorisation,” the IGIS said. Any breaches of legislation or the required authorisations would be described “in general terms” in the annual report. The attorney-general, George Brandis, meanwhile, in a statement to the Senate, said Guardian Australia’s report published Monday was based on an “unverified document” that had been supplied by “the American traitor Edward Snowden”. The document referenced by Guardian Australia on Monday was shown to senior intelligence officials prior to publication. The veracity of the document was not contested, and none of the Snowden documents sourced worldwide has been shown to be fake. Brandis said surveillance by Australian agencies was governed by a strong and sound legal framework that provided an appropriate balance between national security and the right of citizens to privacy. “The purpose of all of Australia’s intelligence activities and the operation of its intelligence agencies is to serve Australia’s national interests and protect Australian citizens,” Brandis said. “And can I, by way of illustration, point out to the honourable senator that Australian authorities have disrupted terrorist planning in Australia and thwarted a number of mass casualty attacks. As a result of their activities, 23 people have been convicted of terrorism offences in Australia in the last four years,” he said. “Australia’s intelligence has also helped to prevent at least four attacks in South East Asia in the last decade and contributed to the arrest within South East Asia of over 20 terrorists. The government is confident … that the Australian intelligence agencies act in accordance with the law and always to the service of the national interest.”