10.01am GMT Welcome to our hub for all Edward Snowden, NSA and GCHQ-related developments around the world. As arguments rage over how much of our day to day life should be monitored in the name of security, we'll be tracking the growing global debate about privacy in the digital age. We'd like to know what you think about the whole NSA story, what you're worried about – and any new areas you'd like to read more about. Good morning. Here are the headlines: • Australia's surveillance agency offered to share information collected about ordinary Australian citizens with its major intelligence partners, according to a secret 2008 document leaked by the US whistleblower Edward Snowden. As Ewen MacAskill, James Ball and Katharine Murphy report: The document shows the partners discussing whether or not to share "medical, legal or religious information", and increases concern that the agency could be operating outside its legal mandate, according to the human rights lawyer Geoffrey Robertson QC. The Australian intelligence agency, then known as the Defence Signals Directorate (DSD), indicated it could share bulk material without some of the privacy restraints imposed by other countries, such as Canada. "DSD can share bulk, unselected, unminimised metadata as long as there is no intent to target an Australian national," notes from an intelligence conference say. "Unintentional collection is not viewed as a significant issue." The agency acknowledged that more substantial interrogation of the material would, however, require a warrant. It is unclear what, if any, specific actions followed the 2008 meeting between the “Five Eyes” intelligence-sharing partners – the US, Britain, Canada, New Zealand and Australia. • Here Oliver Laughland examines whether metadata is “just billing data” or in fact “extremely intimate material”. • Tony Abbott, Australia’s prime minister, said he had no evidence his country’s spy agencies had acted outside the law and has argued that current “stringent” safeguards work to prevent overreach by the intelligence services. • Australia’s intelligence watchdog, the Inspector General of Intelligence and Security, said it maintained “ongoing visibility” of all activities undertaken by the Australian Signals Directorate as the federal attorney-general George Brandis, moved to discredit the new Snowden document. • Here Paul Farrell examines the history of Five Eyes – the intelligence-sharing agreement between Britain, the US, Australia, New Zealand and Canada. The exchange of intelligence was an important part of US-UK efforts during the second world war. This co-operation continued after the war, resulting in the UKUSA agreement of 1946 … By 1955 the role of the other 5-Eyes nations was formalised. • Has DSD been exceeding its powers since 2008, asks Geoffrey Robertson, who was born in Sydney and holds dual Australian and British citizenship. [The new document] calls for an answer to the Quis Custodiet question: who guards the guardians? … The answer to the Quis Custodiet question, in Australia, will be Nemo – nobody. • Meanwhile, in Britain, anti-terror law watchdog David Anderson QC has said police should no longer be able to detain people at the UK's borders without any suspicion of wrongdoing, following the detention of David Miranda – partner of former Guardian journalist Glenn Greenwald – in August. I’ll have live coverage of all developments throughout the day. Updated at 4.44pm GMT