The ABC’s managing director, Mark Scott, launched a robust defence of the editorial independence of the national broadcaster as Coalition MPs lambasted his organisation for publishing material in co-operation with Guardian Australia shedding light on covert regional surveillance activities. Scott appeared on ABC24 on Tuesday morning to answer questions about the ABC’s decision to publish with Guardian Australia material revealing that Australian intelligence had attempted in 2009 to tap the mobile phones of the Indonesian president, his wife and their inner circle. While the managing director was speaking on his live news channel, his judgment was being blasted in the Coalition party room meeting in Canberra by the communications minister, Malcolm Turnbull, and by Coalition MPs including South Australian Liberal Cory Bernardi, and the speaker of the House of Representatives, Bronwyn Bishop. While backing Scott as managing director, Turnbull told the meeting the ABC had displayed a “shocking error of judgment” in publishing co-operatively with Guardian Australia. But back on ABC24, Scott suggested it would have been wrong of an independent broadcaster to walk away from a story it viewed to have significant public interest simply because it was controversial, and would generate political “heat”. Scott said close to 20 respected media outlets around the world, including The New York Times, Channel 4 and Pro Publica, had worked collaboratively to publish material brought into the public domain by the former National Security Agency contractor-turned-whistleblower Edward Snowden. He pointed to other professional collaborations this year between the ABC and Fairfax Media, and a looming joint project with the Australian, the News Corp-owned national broadsheet. Scott declined to go into specifics of a recent negative conversation he had had with Turnbull about the ABC’s decision to co-operate with Guardian Australia on the Indonesia story. He said: “I don’t want to comment on private conversations I’ve had with politicians. I would say that every politician I meet has a view and a perspective on ABC stories and ABC programming.” But he said some of the criticism the ABC was facing was not about editorial judgments but about ideology and commercial imperatives. Scott said some sections of News Corp – the Australian media company that has been most critical of the ABC since publication – maintained a “deep opposition to public broadcasting”. Some sections of News Corp, Scott said, were “quite obsessed” with the ABC. “I think in a sense there is some ideology behind some of the critics – I also think there are some who think they would make more money if in fact the ABC wasn’t the ABC of today.” Commercial publishers in Australia, including News Corp, have made no secret of their opposition to the ABC steadily expanding its services to include online news reporting and analysis which is delivered free to readers around the country and around the region. One of the most significant challenges facing commercial publishers is finding viable models to charge their readers for digital content, and there is a strong view in commercial media that the ABC makes that task harder. News Corp was also furious when the ABC maintained its prime position as the major regional broadcaster through the Australia Network. Sky News launched a strong bid to operate that regional broadcasting service, and lost out. Both News Corp and Sky News argue regularly that the position determined under the Gillard government should be reversed. Scott contended the Indonesia story had clear public interest. He said a subsequent story, published by Guardian Australia on Monday, pointing to a conversation between intelligence agencies around data sharing in 2008, was also raising legitimate public interest. “We are an independent media organisation and of course sometimes we will publish stories that politicians won’t be happy about. We are an independent media organisation. That’s the role we have to play,” Scott said on Tuesday. Back in the Coalition party room, there was strong sentiment against the ABC, the chief critic being the South Australian Liberal senator Cory Bernardi. MPs noted their belief that the ABC was in breach of its charter and was cannibalising the local media landscape. There were views expressed that the ABC had too many TV channels and took up significant taxpayer resources. Turnbull made a reference to “last century work practices” at the broadcaster – which could be a signal that in future it will need to do more with less. At the weekend, the prime minister rebuked the ABC for being an “advertising amplifier for the Guardian” and said people were entitled to question the judgment to publish co-operatively with Guardian Australia. “It was the Guardian's story which the ABC seemed to want to advertise, even though there's not normally advertising on the ABC," Abbott told News Corp columnist and Ten Network broadcaster Andrew Bolt. He repeated his view on Tuesday that the ABC should not have been in the business of “touting” material published by a “left wing British newspaper.” On Tuesday Abbott avoided answering a question about whether it was legitimate for the ABC to co-operate with media companies such as Fairfax Media and News Corp, as flagged by Scott during his ABC24 interview, or whether those co-productions would also constitute “touting” for their publications. Abbott implied the primary judgment to publish the Snowden material was wrong. He said that view had also been expressed by Labor’s deputy leader, Tanya Plibersek, who he said did not reflexively argue that intelligence stories should not be published. The prime minister said he understood why commercial media companies felt there was not a level playing field when the ABC attracted taxpayer funds to the tune of $1bn. But he said he had “no plans” to crimp the ABC. “It’s been thus for many a long year and the government has no plans to change that,” Abbott said.