9.17am AEST Good morning Guardianistas, Strap yourself in. It is going to be a long day. The Abbott government is fighting fires on many fronts today. We are in the final sitting fortnight of 2013 and it appears this Parliament is not going to be the calm predictable forum that Tony Abbott predicted. It is more like a bag of cats. This is what we are serving up today. Nick Butterly at the West Australian has obtained a recording of former Howard advisor Grahame Morris asking defence minister David Johnson about the Guardian's Snowden leaks. Johnson appears to confirm widespread spying goes on and suggests there is worse to come. We have the many positions of Christopher Pyne, who has been hurtling down the mat like a Russian gymnast, taking his education position from Conski to unity ticket to Shorten Shambles to "same funding envelope" to new unknown model and then back to Gonski. Got it? Kathryn Greiner has been expressing her nervousness at his "no strings attached" model that allows the states to cut their funding. Labor's model tied the states to committing a certain level of money. Pyne's response? States which cut funding will be punished at the ballot box. Late last night the Greens and Labor blocked temporary protection visas in the Senate. Immigration minister Scott Morrison has vowed to find a way around it.  The Abbott government is negotiating with the Greens, the party they called economic fringe dwellers, on the debt ceiling. Labor and the Greens have only allowed a raising of the nation's credit card to $400bn, whereas Treasurer Joe Hockey has "applied" for $500bn. Greens leader Christine Milne says the impasse is an opportunity to look at other options, such as chucking out the ceiling altogether to stop the political pointscoring. And the High Court will consider the legal ramifications of the ACT's same sex marriage laws. The federal government is challenging on the basis that the laws do not accord with the commonwealth marriage laws. Stay with us for the day's events. Updated at 11.41am AEST