2.40pm GMT • Michael Gove, the education secretary, has said that today's Pisa report from the OECD comparing education systems internationally vindicates the coalition's reforms. This is what he told MPs in a statement:  There's no single intervention or indeed single nation which has all the answers to our education challenges. But if you look at all the high performing and fast-improving education systems, certain common features do recur. There's an emphasis on social justice, helping every child to succeed. There's a commitment to an aspirational academic curriculum for all students. There is a high level of autonomy from bureaucracy for head teachers. There's a rigorous system of accountability performance and head teachers have the critical power to hire who they want, remove under-performers and reward the best with the recognition that they deserve. Those principles have driven this coalition's education reforms since 2010. As Richard Adams reports, the reports shows that "a stubborn gap in attainment between Britain's best- and worst-performing students has pinned the UK to the middle of international education rankings, despite years of effort by successive governments to raise standards." • Boris Johnson has clarified his stance on inequality, saying he wants to cut it. In remarks that could be seen as something of a U-turn, he said: What I was saying [in his Margaret Thatcher lecture last week] actually is that there is too much inequality, and my speech was actually a warning, as correctly reported by many newspapers, actually a warning against letting this thing go unchecked. Johnson said that he had been "wilfully" misinterpreted (see 9.58am), and it is true that in his speech he made a case for social mobility. But in his speech he did not argue for measures to reduce inequality. Admittedly he did speak of the "harshness" associated with inequality and said: "We cannot ignore this change in relative economic standing, and the resentment it sometimes brings." But he also said that "some measure of inequality is essential for the spirit of envy" and he suggested that people would be more willing to tolerate inequality if they realised quite how much tax the wealthy (or tax heroes, as he called them) paid. He did say that he would like the rich to give more to charity. But he did not suggest that this was because philanthropy would reduce inequality. Again, as with his tax argument, he seemed to be saying this would make inequality more palatable. However, today he is saying there is too much inequality. On his LBC phone-in he also put in a vintage display of Johnson buffoonery, struggling to answer a question about the cost of a cash tube fare and bungling IQ questions. Not for the first time, I suspected he was using humour to conceal a significant political retreat. A reminder of how controversial his speech was came when Labour's Tristram Hunt, the shadow education secretary, told MPs that the speech contained an "unpleasant whiff of eugenics" • David Cameron has told the Chinese leadership that he would welcome investment by Beijing in Britain's high-speed rail network. • Cameron has dismissed an attack by an official Chinese newspaper that described Britain as "just an old European country apt for travel and study". • Chris Bryant, the shadow welfare minister, has said the revelation that just 2,000 people are receiving universal credit (pdf) shows the scheme is "in chaos". Today’s figures show there are just 2,000 people receiving universal credit despite the department for work and pensions once claiming a million people would be on it by next April. It’s clear to everyone but this out-of-touch government that universal credit is in chaos. It’s time for David Cameron and Iain Duncan Smith to come clean and tell us how they’re going to fix this problem. Families facing a cost-of-living crisis deserve better than this. • Nick Clegg has pledged the UK government's help in the aftermath of the Glasgow helicopter disaster, adding that the whole of the UK admired the city's resilience and compassion. • Ministers have reportedly dropped plans to create the UK's first toll road for a decade are to be dropped, with improvements to the A14 instead funded from general taxation. • The BBC Trust has rejected a complaint about Radio 1's decision to cut down Ding Dong! The Witch is Dead, which hit number 2 in the charts following the death of Margaret Thatcher, describing it as an inappropriate "celebration of death". • Barristers across the UK will strike next month in protest against the government's proposed cuts to legal aid, the Criminal Bar Association (CBA) has confirmed. As the Press Association reports, thousands of legal representatives will not attend court on the morning of January 6, 2014, potentially causing severe delays in ongoing trials.  • William Hague, the foreign secretary, has told MPs that Russia should stop blocking a trade deal between Ukraine and the EU. There is one principle barrier - it is the pressure from Russia not to sign such an agreement and not to make this agreement with the European Union. We disagree with that assessment even from Russia's point of view. It would be in the interests of Russia, in the interests of the whole of eastern Europe, to have more open trade and cooperation with each other. We will go on setting out the advantages and also looking to Ukraine to clearly meet the criteria that are set out in the association agreement. Reliable studies have suggested average wages would rise in Ukraine and exports to the EU would rise by an estimated 6%.  Updated at 3.14pm GMT