9.57am GMT Welcome to our hub for all Edward Snowden, NSA and GCHQ-related developments around the world. As arguments rage over how much of our day to day life should be monitored in the name of security, we'll be tracking the growing global debate about privacy in the digital age. We'd like to know what you think about the whole NSA story, what you're worried about – and any new areas you'd like to read more about. Good morning. This afternoon the Guardian's editor-in-chief, Alan Rusbridger, is due to appear before the Commons home affairs committee to answer questions about the paper's reporting of surveillance by Britain's GCHQ and the US National Security Agency. The hearing, billed as a "counter-terrorism evidence session", will begin at 3pm GMT. 3pm: Alan Rusbridger, editor, the Guardian 4pm: Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe, Metropolitan police commissioner, and Cressida Dick, assistant commissioner, Metropolitan police I'll live blog the whole session here. The Commons home affairs select committee is chaired by Labour’s Keith Vaz. These are the other members: • Ian Austin (Labour) • Nicola Blackwood (Conservative) • James Clappison (Conservative) • Michael Ellis (Conservative) • Paul Flynn (Labour) • Lorraine Fullbrook (Conservative) • Julian Huppert (Liberal Democrat) • Yasmin Qureshi (Labour) • Mark Reckless (Conservative) • David Winnick (Labour) Both Huppert and Winnick have spoken out forcefully in favour of the Guardian's right to publish the Snowden revelations, and criticised the security services for having kept the extent of their surveillance programmes secret. By contrast, Austin was notably unsympathetic to the paper and its decision to write stories based on Snowden’s leaks when the committee questioned David Anderson QC, the independent reviewer of terrorism legislation, and Charles Farr, the director-general of the Office for Security and Counter-terrorism at the Home Office, on counter-terrorism and the Snowden revelations last month. At the same session Vaz asked Anderson if he was a Guardian reader, at which point Winnick interrupted to state: "It's not yet a criminal offence, even to this Tory government." Today Watergate journalist Carl Bernstein has written an open letter to Rusbridger calling his appearance before the committee “something quite different in purpose and dangerously pernicious: an attempt by the highest UK authorities to shift the issue from government policies and excessive government secrecy in the United States and Great Britain to the conduct of the press – which has been quite admirable and responsible in the case of the Guardian, particularly, and the way it has handled information initially provided by Mr Snowden.” The former Washington Post legend adds: Rather than hauling in journalists for questioning and trying to intimidate them, the Commons would do well to encourage and join that debate over how the vast electronic intelligence-gathering capabilities of the modern security-state can be employed in a manner that gives up little or nothing to real terrorists and real enemies and skilfully uses all our technological capabilities to protect us, while at the same time taking every possible measure to insure that these capabilities are not abused in a way that would abrogate the rights and privacy of law-abiding citizens. In other NSA/Snowden news today: • The UN's senior counter-terrorism official is to launch an investigation into the surveillance powers of American and British intelligence agencies following Snowden's revelations that they are using secret programmes to store and analyse billions of emails, phone calls and text messages. "The astonishing suggestion that this sort of responsible journalism can somehow be equated with aiding and abetting terrorism needs to be scotched decisively," said Ben Emmerson, who has been the UN's leading voice on counter-terrorism and human rights since 2011. He added: It is the role of a free press to hold governments to account, and yet there have even been outrageous suggestions from some Conservative MPs that the Guardian should face a criminal investigation. It has been disheartening to see some tabloids giving prominence to this nonsense. You can read his full remarks here.  • In Australia the opposition Labor party is calling for a debate on the legal oversight of intelligence gathering to ensure privacy and national security are properly balanced following recent Guardian revelations. Meanwhile defence minister David Johnston says the intelligence cooperation between the Five Eyes partners – the UK, US, Australia, New Zealand and Canada – has achieved too much to “even contemplate a backward step”. • Here the editor-in-chief of Guardian Australia, Katharine Viner, fiercely defends the paper’s reporting based on the Snowden documents. In partnership with the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, Guardian Australia revealed that Australia’s spy agencies had targeted the mobile phone of the Indonesian president and his wife, this week following up by revealing that Australia’s spy agencies had offered to share mettadata about ordinary citizens. Viner writes: The revelations have, in the vast majority of cases, prompted calls for reform and debate. In some instances they have been met with calls for newspapers to be gagged and those people who dare to speak the truth to be intimidated into silence. Modern history shows us what happens when you stand on the wrong side of that line ... In Australia, as in every country in which we have reported these stories, the relevant agencies were consulted before publication. This was to give them the opportunity to express any concerns that were genuinely about serious threats to national security rather than diplomatic embarrassment, and to give them the opportunity to corroborate and contextualise the information. • In this video, Australian PM Tony Abbott attacks the ABC for acting as an “advertising agent” for a “leftwing British newspaper” in working with the Guardian on the NSA story. But he said he had no plans to retaliate by cutting funding to the public broadcaster. • In order to demonstrate what metadata is and how revealing it can be, my colleague Oliver Laughland kept a log for 24 hours of all his technology use. At 11.46am I replied to an email titled “Life” from “Mum”. The email was sent from Twickenham in London, four days previously. I had marked it as a priority. I have received 89 emails in the past 24 hours, including eight from katharine.viner@theguardian.com sent from Canberra and four from the office of the prime minister of Australia. I have sent 17 emails. Subject lines of emails received during the 24-hour period have included “SOS SOS SOS SOS” from bridie.jabour@theguardian.com, “Credit Card Debit Rejected” from customer_service@tpg.com.au, and “My favourite pool” from vicky.frost@theguardian.com. I entered more than 50 Google search terms in 24 hours. These included: “Scott Morrison Christianity”, “Scott Morrison TPV”, “Scott Morrison Manus capacity”, “Buzzfeed Syrian Army Cats”, “define insouciant” and “section 15 intelligence services act”. I Googled “Oliver Laughland” twice. The last action I took on my phone on 2 December, from Darlinghurst, Sydney, was to Google “Hotels Phuket January” at 10.40pm. The first action I took on my phone on 3 December, from the same location in Darlinghurst, was to check my emails at 7.31am (I received 15 from the last time I checked at 10.37pm). • And here Jon Lawrence and Sean Rintel look at eight ways to protect your privacy online. I’ll be covering all major developments here throughout day, and the select committee hearing from 3pm GMT. Updated at 4.01pm GMT