Tony Abbott spoke at the launch of the Prime Minister's XI. It's a bit of an insight into the PM, who doesn't talk on a personal level in public too often, so here it is. The tradition of the Prime Minister’s XI goes back to the glory days of Sir Robert Menzies in 1951. Then the tradition fell into abeyance. It was revived by Bob Hawke in 1984 and it’s continued ever since. It’s lovely to see the photographs of Prime Ministers who have been involved in this. Hawkey doesn’t seem to be up there for some reason – Manuka Oval what are you doing? He was a fine Prime Minister, in many respects – although a political antagonist – and as the reviver of this tradition, along with the founder of this tradition, I expect that next time I come, I’ll see Sir Robert Menzies’ and Bob Hawke’s photographs up there as well. Unlike Bob Hawke, unlike Sir Robert Menzies, unlike John Winston Howard, I’m not a cricket tragic. I was taken to the nets along with every other year seven student at St Ignatius College at the end of our first week in 1970. I was given a ball, told to give a couple of balls to a batsman and after my second ball they said, “you’re a rower, mate!” So, I missed out on cricket in my youth. I came to appreciate watching cricket as a student when I spent some memorable university holidays on The Hill at the Sydney Cricket Ground watching Sheffield Shield games and watching test matches, but I never actually got to play the game until I was at Oxford University. I was the Secretary of the Queens College Middle Common Room and I discovered that as the Secretary of the Queens College Middle Common Room, I was the ex-officio captain of the Middle Common Room cricket team and I thought, “this is a bit of a burden”, until I discovered that the only way to get a drink in the middle of the afternoon in England in those days was to be involved in a sporting fixture, because the Pavilion Bar was open at a time when the pubs were not. Funnily enough, during my tenure as the Queens College Middle Common Room cricket captain, it had more games than any other team at the College! I think I was there not as a batsman, not as a bowler, not as a fielder, but probably as a sledger. So, perhaps it was good training for my subsequent life in politics and in the Parliament!