Top eight stories on MediaGuardian Sky to open movie rental service to non-subscribers Satellite TV giant takes battle to Netflix, LoveFilm and Blinkbox with app available on on Youview and Roku set-top boxes Tweeters warned about contempt of court Attorney general Dominic Grieve hopes to prevent legal novices publishing remarks that might cause trials to be abandoned Alan Rusbridger: Guardian will not be intimidated Editor tells parliamentary committee that stories revealing mass surveillance by UK and US have prompted global debate BBC re-enactment of scene breached guidelines Trust's editorial standards committee says public were misled by faked element in scene from The Great Bear Stakeout BBC rejects complaint over Thatcher protest song Ding Dong! The Witch is Dead became a 'celebration' of ex-PM's death and Radio 1 was right not to play it in full, says trust Ex-Daily Star editor killed in Spanish road accident Brian Hitchen and his wife were struck by a car while crossing a road Guardian Australia defends spy reporting Attacks on the publication of stories based on NSA documents threaten to shut down debate on the issues that matter Google signs Game of Thrones deal with HBO Boardwalk Empire, True Blood and Veep also among series to be made available on Google Play for first time Top comment on MediaGuardian David Montgomery's 'reverse ferret' is hard to believe Steve Dyson: An open letter to the chairman and chief executive of Local World following his leaked 'internal working paper' Today's headlines The Guardian British Comedy awards nominations. P5 Alan Rusbridger's appearance before select committee. P6 Roy Greenslade: Whose 'public interest' is it anyway? P6 BBC admits faking scenes in bear documentary. P14 Twitter users warned over contentious court cases. P17 Sony racks up 2.1m PlayStation 4 sales. P30 Daily Telegraph BBC bear footage was 'misleading' for viewers. P2 ITV unveils details of Downton Abbey Christmas special. P3 Chinese press belittles 'old' Britain. P8 Guardian staff under police investigation over Edward Snowden leaks. P14 Michael Deacon on Alan Rusbridger's appearance before select committee. P14 Obituary: Former Daily Star editor Brian Hitchen. P31 Sky opens online movie rental store. Business P1 Financial Times Met confirms anti-terror inquiry into Guardian. P4 Twitter to warn users on contempt of court rules. P4 HTC faces ban over Nokia patents battle. P18 Spotify tunes in to artists' gripes. P18 AT&T could mount bid for Vodafone. P19 The Times Famous people who use Twitter are morons, says George Clooney> P3 Chinese press attacks Davis cameron - but wants more Downton Abbey. P4 BBC bear footage was 'misleading' for viewers. P20 Jimmy Savile report author Nick Pollard told to account for 'mistake' over evidence. P20 Two senior BBC executives spent £7,000 on US flights. P20 We are patriots at the Guardian, editor insists. P24 The Independent Twitter to warn users on contempt of court rules. P1,5 MPs question Guardian editor's patriotism over Edward Snowden leaks. P17 BBC bear footage was 'misleading' for viewers. P19 ITV to air Lord Lucan drama. P39 i Oscar-nominated actor Paul Giamatti to join Downton Abbey cast. P3 Attorney general warns the public about social media gaffes. P9 Guardian editor appears before Home Affairs select committee. P19 Interviews with the stars of ITV drama Lord Lucan. P37 Wall Street Journal Europe Apple buys firm to mine Twitter data. P!8 Daily Mail Forced caesarean mother speaks out as council bids to gag press. P10 ITV and BBC1 to go head to head with Christmas Day schedules. P11 Guardian may face terror charges over Edward Snowden leaks. P12 Quentin Letts on Alan Rusbridger's appearance before select committee. P12 Boris Johnson fails intelligence test live on LBC. P19 Olivia Colman snubbed by producers of US Broadchurch. P25 Too many pretty girls host sport on TV, say MPs. P25 BBC admits faking key scenes in bear documentary. P31 Daily Express ITV and BBC1 to go head to head with Christmas Day schedules. P5 I'm a Celebrity coverage. P5 The Sun Fifa investigated for racism after replacing black TV hosts with white couple. P5 Apology for BBC bear 'trickery'. P8 I'm a Celebrity coverage. P14-15 ITV and BBC1 to go head to head with Christmas Day schedules. P19 Boris Johnson fails intelligence test live on LBC. P31 Cyber-bullying feature. P33 Lucy Mecklenburgh quits The Only Way is Essex. TV Biz P1 Celine Dion refuses to sing with The X Factor's Sam Bailey. TV Biz P1 British Comedy awards nominations. TV Biz P2 Coronation Street coverage. TV Biz P2-3 Daily Mirror EastEnders and Downton Abbey in Christmas Day scheduling clash. P3 Guardian editor accused of putting UK spies at risk. P4 Loose Women's Jamelia forgives lover who allegedly abused her. P9 Boris Johnson flunks IQ test on radio show. P22 BBC boss calls Match of the Day host Gabby Lineker. P23 Hovis boy recreates TV ad 40 years on. P27 Daily Star Will.i.am reveals BBC tried to ban him from saying 'dope' on The Voice. P3 I'm a Celebrity coverage. P4, P5 BBC director of sport names Gary Lineker as top of her list of female talent. P7 Tom Daley hit with deluge of homophobic tweets since revealing he is dating a man. P11 EastEnders to go head to head with Downton Abbey on Christmas Day. P31 Go to MediaGuardian