Andrew Parker gives evidence at the intelligence and security committee, whose members are appointed by the PM rather than parliament. Photograph: Reuters The head of MI5, Andrew Parker, has agreed in principle to appear before the Commons home affairs committee to justify his claim that the Guardian has endangered national security by publishing leaks from the former NSA contractor Edward Snowden. No date has been set for the appearance of the security service chief. Whether or not he appears in public is also yet to be decided. Parker's appearance before the home affairs committee will be an unprecedented step in the history of the oversight of the intelligence services in Britain. The public appearance of the chiefs of the three intelligence services, MI5, MI6 and GCHQ, before the intelligence and security committee (ISC) last month was itself the first time they had given evidence in front of the cameras. But the members of the ISC are appointed by the prime minister and not by parliament and there was criticism after the hearing that the questions had been pre-arranged with the security chiefs. The decision by the Commons home affairs committee to invite Parker was taken at a private session of the Commons home affairs committee just minutes before they questioned the Guardian editor, Alan Rusbridger, over the paper's decision to publish a string of disclosures about the mass scale of surveillance by GCHQ and the NSA based on the Snowden files. During the hearing, the committee chair, Keith Vaz, announced that it had been decided that Parker would be invited to give evidence in public. It is understood the MPs rejected a move to allow the director general of MI5 to give his evidence in private. Julian Huppert, a Liberal Democrat member of the committee, said: "A precedent has been set and now that the heads of the security services have given evidence once in public they should do so again to us, and not just to MPs they would like to have ask them questions. I would expect Mr Parker to attend." But it appears that the precise terms on which Parker will appear will now be subject to some discussion. A public appearance by Parker in front of the Commons home affairs committee would have implications for the sole oversight role claimed by the ISC. The intelligence services chiefs have however given evidence in private in the past to the Commons home affairs committee. Whitehall sources responded to Vaz's announcement by saying that Parker had not received a request from the committee to attend a hearing: "When he receives one, he will consider it. But at the moment, he hasn't received an invitation. He has not had sight of any request to appear next week or next year." Vaz later wrote to Parker issuing him a formal written invitation to give evidence on Tuesday 17 December saying: "I know you have already agreed in principle to meet the committee but we were unfortunately not able to agree a date before the summer recess." He asked him to "confirm his attendence" by next Monday and offered any "special arrangements" about broadcasting or transcription that were made for Parker's historic public appearance before the intelligence and security committee. Vaz has also written to Sir Kim Darroch, the national security adviser, to give evidence on the same date or on 14 January.