1.46pm GMT • David Cameron has admitted finding the process for infrastructure development in the UK "frustrating". He made the comment in an interview in China as Danny Alexander, the chief secretary to the Treasury, published a national infrastructure plan confirming plans to dispose of Britain's stake in Eurostar as part of a £20bn privatisation programme. Asked about the slow pace of projects like HS2, Cameron said: It is frustrating sometimes that we can't do things faster in Britain but we have a planning system, we have democratic accountability for that planning system, we have a need for everyone to have their say and make their point. That's very important in the British system. I think we can keep that system and that democracy but at the same time accelerate things and make them go faster. If you look at what this Government's done in terms of planning policy, decisions are now being taken faster, including on major infrastructure projects. • The government has confirmed that subsidies for onshore wind and solar energy will be cut, while subsidies for offshore wind will be increased. Ukip's energy spokesman, Roger Helmer, dismissed this as a "political stunt". He went on: "It fails to address the real argument which is the nonsensical and frankly dangerous energy policy this Government is forcing upon UK taxpayers."  • Business groups have welcomed reports that the government will cap increases in business rates. This is fromJohn Longworth, director general of the British Chambers of Commerce. It is heartening that the chancellor appears to be listening to business, and is planning to limit the damage caused by relentless business rates increases. But a tax rise is still a tax rise. Although a cap on rates would spare businesses some £300 million in tax hikes, and reliefs help many of the smallest firms, companies of all sizes will still be paying hundreds of millions more in rates to the Exchequer next year than the £27 billion they are expected to pay in this year.  • Cameron has said that it is possible to cut taxes and reduce the fiscal deficit at the same time as the economy recovers. As Nicholas Watt reports, Amid fury in Downing Street at reports that the prime minister has ruled out tax cuts for middle-income earners for the next decade, Cameron said that reducing the deficit and cutting taxes were not alternatives.Speaking in the Sichuan capital of Chengdu on the final day of his visit toChina, the prime minister told the BBC: "The two aren't alternatives. It is possible to reduce people's taxes as your economy recovers. In April, there's going to be another significant tax cut as we complete the programme of allowing people to earn £10,000 before they pay anyincome tax at all. That's worth over £700 to the typical taxpayer." • Britain has won the right to export pig semen to China in a deal worth £45m a year. • The police officer at the centre of the Plebgate row that cost Andrew Mitchell his cabinet job is to sue the former chief whip for libel. As the Guardian reports, Toby Rowland, the officer on duty in Downing Street at the time of the altercation, insists Mitchell called him a pleb. Mitchell accused him of lying as part of his own libel appeal against the Sun. Now Rowland is to launch a libel action of his own against Mitchell. • The coalition is having to raid its school capital budget to find an extra £200m to build new school kitchens and fulfil its pledge to let all primary school children aged five-to seven-year-old receive a free school meal, a pledge announced by Nick Clegg at his party conference in September, it has emerged. As Patrick Wintour reports, In last-minute talks Whitehall sources said Clegg has been forced to raid either the schools maintenance budget or its basic needs budget to fund emergency construction and improvement of school kitchens to meet higher demand for school meals. The need to build extra kitchens had not been foreseen at the time of the initial £600m announcement. • The head of MI5, Andrew Parker, has agreed in principle to appear before the Commons home affairs committee to justify his claim that the Guardian has endangered national security by publishing leaks from the former NSA contractor Edward Snowden. • Theresa May, the home secretary, has said that Muslim chaplains are to be trained to challenge extremist Islamic views on university campuses as part of plans to prevent the spread of radical ideologies. As the Press Association reports, May said they would be used to prevent terrorist prisoners radicalising others while behind bars. She said the government was also looking at new orders to ban radical groups, including new civil powers to target individual extremists. In a written ministerial statement, she said there were plans to give the Charity Commission greater powers to stop the spread of hate-preaching. The proposals come after an extremist task force was set up to look at ways of stopping the spread of radical hate-preaching.  • The Labour MP John Woodcock has declared that he is being treated for clinical depression. He has written an article about it. Because brilliant, inspiring people have had the courage to speak up and make the case that my latest ailment shouldn’t be treated any differently from these physical injuries, I am just going to come right out and say that I am clinically depressed. I went to see a doctor this week who prescribed me medication to relieve my black moods. • The House of Lords has said the second reading of James Wharton's backbench bill for an EU referendum will be held on Friday 10 January. Updated at 1.57pm GMT