9.51am GMT Welcome to our hub for all Edward Snowden, NSA and GCHQ-related developments around the world. As arguments rage over how much of our day to day life should be monitored in the name of security, we'll be tracking the growing global debate about privacy in the digital age. We'd like to know what you think about the whole NSA story, what you're worried about – and any new areas you'd like to read more about. Good morning. Yesterday, Alan Rusbridger, the Guardian’s editor-in-chief, appeared before the Commons home affairs committee to answer questions about the paper's reporting of surveillance by Britain's GCHQ and the US National Security Agency. You can read my live blog of the session here. Here is an audio version of Rusbridger's testimony. And here’s a video of some of the highlights. Here is our main news report on the session. And here are details of the key exchanges between Rusbridger and the MPs. • Why was an editor being required to explain himself to MPs, asks media commentator Roy Greenslade. • The home affairs committee has challenged the existing system of oversight for the security services by asking the head of MI5 to justify his claims that the Guardian has endangered national security by publishing leaks from the former NSA contractor Edward Snowden. In an unprecedented step, Keith Vaz, the chairman of the home affairs select committee, announced that spy chief Andrew Parker had been summoned to give evidence in public to the Commons committee next week. • Appearing after Rusbridger were Bernard Hogan-Howe, the Metropolitan police commissioner, and assistant commissioner Cressida Dick, Scotland Yard's head of counter-terrorism. Dick said it appeared "possible that some people may have committed offences” when she updated MPs on the state of the investigation into the material seized from David Miranda in August. Dick also said that the Metropolitan police were looking at the "potential" that terrorism offences had been committed involving communicating information about members of the intelligence services. Miranda, who is the partner of the former Guardian journalist, Glenn Greenwald, was stopped at Heathrow airport in August. • The debate over the Snowden leaks should focus on the core questions of privacy in a digital age rather than getting caught up in what the Guardian did or did not do, writes Julian Huppert, a Lib Dem member of the home affairs committee. • Meanwhile Australia’s foreign minister, Julie Bishop, is to travel to Indonesia for talks with her ministerial counterpart which aim to end the diplomatic standoff prompted by Guardian revelations Australia attempted in 2009 to listen in on the president, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, his wife and their inner circle. I'll have live coverage of all developments throughout the day today.