The shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus, has defended the ABC and Guardian Australia’s decision to publish extracts from leaked documents showing that Australian spying authorities targeted the personal mobile phone of the Indonesian president and nine members of his inner circle. “I think the media has a job to publish news,” Dreyfus, who was the country’s first law officer until the September federal election, told Sky News. Asked if Guardian Australia and the ABC, who have come under criticism from the Coalition government over the story, were right to publish, he added: “I am not going to criticise news media organisations that publish news." He said those who were taking a different view may be confusing the national interest with the interests of the Coalition. On Monday the prime minister, Tony Abbott, reiterated his criticism of the national broadcaster for partnering with Guardian Australia on the story. “I think the ABC were guilty of poor judgment in broadcasting that material which was obviously difficult for Australia’s national security and long-term best interests,” Abbott said. “Even Tanya Plibersek says that that material would have been better not broadcast, so I think the ABC was guilty of very, very poor judgment. I think they were also guilty of poor judgment in acting as an advertising agent for the Guardian.” The comments Abbott appeared to be referencing were those made by Plibersek to Sky News. She said she was disappointed the documents revealing the phone tapping were “stolen in the first place”. Asked if she believed it was right for news organisations to publish the material, Plibersek responded: “That's a judgment that media outlets have to make. I understand why they see it as a story but certainly I think it will be preferable if the documents had never been released in the first place.” As attorney general, Dreyfus was an ardent critic of the NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden, who leaked the documents showing the phone tapping attempts from 2009. In August he described Snowden’s leaks as “politically motivated”. During his time in office Dreyfus also championed legislation within Australia to bolster and unify shield laws for journalists and to enhance protection for whistleblowers in the public service.