9.57am GMT Welcome to our hub for all Edward Snowden, NSA and GCHQ-related developments around the world. As arguments rage over how much of our day to day life should be monitored in the name of security, we'll be tracking the growing global debate about privacy in the digital age. We'd like to know what you think about the whole NSA story, what you're worried about – and any new areas you'd like to read more about. Good morning. Here are the headlines: • British MPs are engaged in a tussle with the head of MI5 over whether the spy chief would give evidence to parliament in public to a Commons select committee. Andrew Parker has agreed in principle to appear before the home affairs select committee, but neither the status of the hearing, whether it would be in public or private, nor its timing had been confirmed. • The US National Security Agency is reportedly collecting almost 5 billion mobile phone records a day under a programme that monitors and analyses highly personal data about the precise whereabouts of individuals, wherever they travel in the world, the Washington Post has revealed, based on documents provided by Edward Snowden. • The US National Security Agency has considered spying on Australian citizens without the knowledge or consent of the Australian intelligence organisations it partners with, according to a draft 2005 NSA directive kept secret from other countries. • A fiery and divisive Australian Senate debate on Wednesday night about the central policy questions raised by the leaks of intelligence material by Edward Snowden repeatedly referred to a bipartisan committee report which has already recommended domestic intelligence oversight be strengthened, Lenore Taylor reports. • The Australian shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus, has defended the ABC and Guardian Australia’s decision to publish extracts from leaked documents showing that Australian spying authorities targeted the personal mobile phone of the Indonesian president and nine members of his inner circle. • Australia and Indonesia have agreed to set up a hotline to help avoid future diplomatic disputes after talks in Jakarta between Foreign Minister Julie Bishop and her Indonesian counterpart, Marty Natalegawa. • Sweden has been a key partner for the United States in spying on Russia and its leadership, Swedish television said on Thursday, citing leaked documents from the US National Security Agency. Reuters reports: Swedish television cited a document dated April 18 this year saying Sweden's National Defence Radio Establishment (FRA), which conducts electronic communications surveillance, had helped in providing the United States with information on Russia. "The FRA provided NSA ... a unique collection on high-priority Russian targets, such as leadership, internal politics," it quoted the document saying. The FRA declined to comment on the matter. "We do in general have international cooperation with a number of countries, which is supported in Swedish legislation, but we do not comment on which ones we cooperate with," Anni Bolenius, head of communications at the FRA said. In a separate document, high level NSA employees were told to "thank Sweden for its continued work on the Russian target, and underscore the primary role that FRA plays as a leading partner to work the Russian target, including Russian leadership and counterintelligence." Previously, Sweden's FRA has said only that it cooperates with foreign intelligence services, but that all activities are strictly controlled by Swedish law. Swedish television said it had obtained the documents from Glenn Greenwald, the journalist who brought the Snowden leaks to world attention. I'll cover key events here throughout the day.