Norman Tebbit - seen at the Conservative party conference in 1985 with Margaret Thatcher, another supporter of the apartheid regime - is one of a few apparently still fighting the war. Photograph: BRIAN HARRIS / Alamy/Alamy • Though many Conservatives now wish to revise the view they once held of Nelson Mandela and the African National Congress, and avoid contemporaneous damage, one does wonder whether they can be trusted in this area: though the eye is taken by those who obviously repent, such as speaker John Bercow, there are some who just look awkward and a few apparently still fighting the war, such as Lord Tebbit. One would so like to put all this behind us, but it is difficult to draw that line without sufficient apology to the electorate from the Tories – the kind of repeated knee-bending apology they continually insist on dragging out of Labour over past stewardship of the economy and immigration. PM Dave has had a go, notably in 2006, but it's important, for without genuine proof of contrition there is no credibility. Isn't that the argument they've used against Labour for the past three years? Surely medicine they could now take themselves. • And how might that go? Well, they might follow the example of Tom Zarges, the boss of Nuclear Management Partners, the private consortium in charge of cleaning up Sellafield. He got a terrible kicking the other day from the public accounts committee. "It would be nice if there was an apology for the lost millions to the British taxpayer," declared chair Margaret Hodge. "We can say that we are sorry and humbled only because we are resolved to set things right," said Zarges. Grovelling on that scale might work. • Extraordinary scenes in South Africa, where the memorial service for Mandela seemed more like a giant celebration. They have decided to remember him with hope and joy rather than sadness, which is what his friend and fellow Robben Island detainee Lionel Davis said he would have wanted. It's some week out there, and local journalists can't help getting swept up in it all. For them, there is stern advice from the government. Under the headline "No drunk journalists," South African paper the Daily News reports, "The government has put together a strict set of guidelines for Madiba's funeral, warning the 2,000 journalists expected to act professionally and not get drunk." They haven't even heard of Leveson. • Yesterday we referred to the kindness of Mandela – who, for all his burdens, found time to correspond with the British author Dominic Shelmerdine when asked to reveal his original ambition. Many of the less famous have indulged in this bit of harmless fun. But there are those who, unlike Mandela, just couldn't be bothered. Sir Kingsley Amis in 1991: "Dear Mr Shelmerdine. On the whole, I do not like writing other people's books for them." Nigella Lawson: "Personal ambitions are private." Geoff Boycott: "Thank you, but no thank you. Too many people expect US to do THEIR work for them." Boycott again: "Dominic, you're just a spoilt brat." Raquel Welch declined, as did Gerald Ratner, Ronald Reagan, Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter. Nothing from Mohamed Al Fayed, and the firmest no from that world-class crook Robert Maxwell. He never did go overboard on that sort of thing. • Brilliant news that an immigration appeals tribunal threw out Theresa May's absurd attempt to deport the boat race protester, Trenton Oldfield. Good news for him, and for May in some respects. A government that professes itself wedded to the family would have a hard time justifying the destruction of his, had Oldfield been forced into exile in Australia, away from his British wife and child. Many fought the good fight, but the saga cannot end without a special mention for the Tory MP Michael Ellis, who complained to the Met commissioner that Oldfield ought to face a more serious charge than that envisaged, one offering custodial possibilities. Not long afterwards, a more severe charge was indeed imposed, ramping up the misery for all concerned. Ellis is making a name for himself, for he it was who sought to be the most disagreeable last week when Guardian editor-in-chief Alan Rusbridger was called before the home affairs select committee to answer questions about the Edward Snowden coverage. Ellis made a twit of himself there, accusing us of leaking info available on public websites, and here we are now, applauding the triumph over adversity of an activist for whom he apparently had little love or time. Happy days. Twitter: @hugh_muir