6.27pm AEST Now, my early thoughts on Holden. The new Coalition government's response to this issue was always going to be a definitional moment for Tony Abbott and his government. The Coalition has let Holden go, either deliberately, or perhaps by accident - but the end result is the same - after 2017, no Holdens rolling off production lines in Australia. A huge call, that. It cannot be spun away. The Coalition has been all over the place on this issue. Holden was told first to wait, possibly until next year, to hear what co-investment cash the government could put on the table. This was difficult. It wanted an answer by Christmas. But the company waited. Late last week the Coalition changed the game again. Holden was told by the prime minister to put up or shut up. Was it staying or was it going. This demand was apparently made in response to media reports suggesting the company had already made up its mind to depart - reports which in fact originated from inside the Abbott government. Economic ministers were briefing the company was going in 2016. Abbott in essence asked Holden to respond to speculation generated by his own ministers. Holden declined to cast itself in whatever silly pantomime was playing out in Canberra. It assessed the landscape and made the call that going was a better decision than staying. Holden says that call was made today. Now the government has to clean up. For several days it has been trying to position itself as 'not the bad guys.' Today, when Holden called the government's bluff, the Coalition shifted blame back across the dispatch box to Labor. You people have been in government the past six years - why didn't you fix this mess was the message. And it's worked in the initial batch of news reports which have zeroed in on 'the blame game' in parliament. Politicians pointing fingers at each other. Who can say who is right and who is wrong. But in this instance at least, there are some clear facts that don't reflect well on the Coalition. Labor couldn't organise a chook raffle in the middle of the Rudd/Gillard fight, but it's hard to sustain a compelling case that the ALP over the past several years made no effort to shore up the car industry. Discussions were well advanced pre-election between the then Labor government and Holden. It only required the Coalition to close the deal, or make a decision to rip it up. Fact is the Coalition did not want to support the carmakers. The weight of internal opinion was against that as a course of action. That's a legitimate point of view - there are sensible arguments to be had about business welfare, whether its justified or not, whether those funds would be better directed elsewhere. But this isn't an academic seminar - this is a consequential decision in every sense. Australia may not have a car industry as a direct consequence of events over the past 24 hours. It's not only Holden. Toyota says it's on the brink. No local manufacturing. That's quite a thing for voters to get their heads around, let alone the Holden employees - almost 3,000 of them - who are facing the prospect of early retirement - and let alone the multiplier effects at a time when the Australian economy is already growing below trend.