The cover of Time magazine's Person of the Year issue, featuring Pope Francis. Photograph: Reuters He faced eclectic competition from a 30-year-old American whistleblower, an octogenarian gay rights champion, a maverick Texas Republican and the Syrian president. But in the end, Pope Francis was declared Time magazine's Person of the Year "for pulling the papacy out of the palace and into the streets". Nine months after cardinals in the Sistine Chapel elected him the 266th leader of the Roman Catholic church, he received the media accolade because of his radical shift in tone, his reformist agenda and his acknowledgement of "the risk that a church obsessed with it own rights and righteousness could inflict more wounds that it heals", wrote Time's editor, Nancy Gibbs. "Rarely has a new player on the world stage captured so much attention so quickly - young and old, faithful and cynical," she added. "He has placed himself at the very centre of the central conversations of our time: about wealth and poverty, fairness and justice, transparency, modernity, globalisation, the role of women, the nature of marriage, the temptations of power." Francis, the Jesuit who began 2013 as cardinal Jorge Bergoglio, archbishop of Buenos Aires, is the third pontiff to be named Time's person of the year: in 1962 it was John XXIII and in 1994 it was John Paul II. In a statement, the Vatican spokesman, Federico Lombardi, said it was "positive" that the title had gone "to one who proclaims spiritual, religious and moral values in the world, and who speaks effectively in favour of peace and greater justice." While the pope himself did not "seek fame and success", he added: "If this attracts men and women and gives them hope, the pope is content. If this … means that many have understood this message, at least implicitly, he will certainly be glad." Shortlisting the US gay rights heroine Edith Windsor, the Republican senator Ted Cruz and Bashar al-Assad of Syria, Time named its "runner-up" as Edward Snowden, the NSA whistleblower responsible for one of the most significant leaks in US political history. Snowden was overwhelmingly voted the Guardian's person of the year.