10.19am GMT Welcome to our hub for all Edward Snowden, NSA and GCHQ-related developments around the world. As arguments rage over how much of our day to day life should be monitored in the name of security, we'll be tracking the growing global debate about privacy in the digital age. We'd like to know what you think about the whole NSA story, what you're worried about – and any new areas you'd like to read more about. Good morning. Here are the headlines: • A former British minister will today try to introduce a bill to tighten up the rules around the interception of communications by the security services to ensure there is judicial oversight of the material captured in this way. The bill – which would make sure Britain's spy agencies could never intercept calls or data without a specific warrant – has some cross-party support from MPs including Labour's Tom Watson, the Conservative former diplomat Rory Stewart, Caroline Lucas, of the Greens, Elfyn Llwyd, the Westminster leader of Plaid Cymru, and Simon Hughes, deputy leader of the Liberal Democrats, Rowena Mason reports. Heath, a Lib Dem, will ask the Commons that "leave be given to bring in a bill to amend the Regulation of Investigative Powers Act 2000 and the Intelligence Services Act 1994 to ensure judicial oversight of the use of material derived from British citizens by means of surveillance of telecommunications". The former deputy leader of the Commons also wants to improve the transparency of the investigatory powers tribunal, which investigates complaints from members of the public made against the intelligence agencies MI5, MI6 and GCHQ. He will also suggest that the intelligence and security committee, the parliamentary body that holds the intelligence agencies to account, be improved by its members being elected; unlike select committees, whose members and the majority of whose chairs are now elected by their fellow MPs, the members of the ISC are appointed by parliament only after nomination by the prime minister. They can be members of the House of Commons and the House of Lords, and serving ministers cannot be chosen. The chair is chosen by the PM. Heath told Rowena: By me saying this as a recent member of the government, I hope it makes the point that this is not a fringe issue. We're very conscious of the need not to prevent the security services doing their work, but there are certainly gaps in the law. That much is clear. The fact America and others are trying to close those gaps suggest we are the odd ones out. Heath’s proposals take the form of a 10-minute rule motion on “surveillance of telecommunications (judicial oversight)". Although his attempt to bring in the bill will take place straight after prime minister’s questions at 12.30pm, and so to a packed Commons, it is unlikely the legislation will make progress without government support or parliamentary time. However, if an MP objects to the motion and puts it to a vote, this may provide a measure of how much support there is for the proposals among MPs. I’ll cover proceedings live here from 12.30pm. • Meanwhile David Cameron and the British government were labelled "America's digital pit bull" at the launch of a campaign by writers against mass surveillance, as Louise Osborne reports here from Berlin. British author Priya Basil told a press conference in Berlin that the political reaction to the revelations from whistleblower Edward Snowden had been "worse in the UK than in Germany". "You can really feel that our democracy and our freedom of speech are under threat," said Basil, one of a small group of international writers who organised the project. "That's why I hope this appeal will have even more resonance in places like Great Britain." More than 500 of the world's leading authors, including five Nobel prize winners, have issued a statement condemning the scale of mass surveillance revealed by whistleblower Edward Snowden and warning that spy agencies are undermining democracy. Updated at 11.25am GMT