Michael Ellis wants to appeal against the immigration tribunal's decision not to deport boat-race protester, Trenton Oldfield. Photograph: Arthur Edwards/The Sun/PA • One can exaggerate the Nasty party thing with the Tory party because there reside many fine folk. But, whatever they do, the tag does seem to stick, and that might have something to do with the likes of Michael Ellis. Who he? He's the MP who seemed most disagreeable the other day when the Home Affairs committee discussed the Edward Snowden revelations with the Guardian's editor-in-chief. He was also the MP who urged police to throw the book at the boat race protester Trenton Oldfield, challenging the initial inclination to charge the activist with a minor offence. And what has he done now? Stung by the decision of an immigration appeals tribunal to overturn the planned deportation of Oldfield, Ellis on Tuesday urged the immigration minister Mark Harper to prolong the agony by considering a further appeal of the tribunal's sensible decision. One hopes Harper will see sense and let things lie. As for Ellis: boo; hiss. • The focus of his ire at Tuesday's home affairs select committee meeting appeared to be the argument forwarded by Oldfield that he and his multiracial family would not thrive in his native Australia – a country he considers racially backward. Ellis urged Harper to reject the notion, as reported, that a court might accept this characterisation of Australia. That element has also yielded a cry of fury from the Daily Mail. But it's probably moot and certainly premature because the judge has yet to document his reasons. And in upholding the appeal, he made no mention of racism in Australia. What he did say, and what apparently informed his decision, was that Oldfield – illegal boat race disruption aside – is a person of good character and a boon to his community. Still, never let the facts get in the way. Once again: boo, hiss. • Monday's day of MPs' tributes to Nelson Mandela narrowly achieved a record. When Baroness Thatcher died last year, Westminster's wordy tributes consumed 107 columns of Hansard. Mandela clocked up 110. Mind you, inflation being what it is, they're all too long-winded by stiff upper lip standards of yesteryear. The last time a foreign leader was honoured with an early adjournment of the Commons was in November 1963 when JFK was murdered, in his prime at 46. Kennedy got nine columns, 3,585 words in all. Dead prime ministers also warrant adjournment debates. But even Churchill only got 12 columns in 1965, Harold Wilson just 15 in 1995. Less was definitely more back then. • The BBC's John Simpson called Obama's Mandela speech the best of his career – and that's saying something. The performance also wowed France, triggering speculation that the speaker of the French assembly would like him to address a joint session of both Parisian houses next summer during the 70th anniversary of D-day celebrations. Only Bill Clinton and Woodrow Wilson have had that honour before. There was relief across the Channel that arch-enemies Sarkozy and Hollande inexplicably managed to behave themselves in Soweto, despite being sat next to each other. The pair flew in on separate Elysée Falcon jets, which in the event was prudent. It stopped them fighting over the in-flight entertainment. • The Catholic Association for Racial Justice certainly has a high opinion of its leadership. At its annual general meeting on Saturday, two black leaders were remembered; Haynes Baptiste, former chair and vice chair of CARJ, and some bloke called Mandela. "Today Pope Francis has honoured another black leader. Haynes Baptiste has served the church and the wider UK society for many years," it said. To Baptiste, of south London, membership of the order of the knights of St Gregory. To Mandela, immortality. Madiba almost stole his thunder, but not quite. • Finally, many criticise Ed Balls but the shadow chancellor keeps his promises. When the children of Commons staff and MP gathered yesterday, he promised – as is traditional – to be Santa. But then he was called upon to vote. And so off went Santa Balls, in full regalia, to do his duty. Down with the government: ho, ho, ho. twitter: @hugh_muir