• A question; are you now or have you ever been a patriot? You know we at the Guardian are patriots, as the editor-in-chief Alan Rusbridger made clear last week to the home affairs select committee during the session on Edward Snowden. It's just that our view of what represents the national interest may occasionally differ from that of our critics. But should he have been asked that question at all? That was the source of much disagreement, we understand, when the select committee met again this week. Out of earshot, it is said, were sharp exchanges occasioned by members sceptical – among them, we are told, Labour's David Winnick – who was seen to mutter disapproval when committee chair Keith Vaz originally put the patriotism question to Rusbridger, and who has written since about his discomfort. Vaz, openly challenged, stoutly defended his right to question witnesses as he sees fit, and he was supported by Tories Michael Ellis and Mark Reckless, both of whom felt the patriotism question was a bit of a zinger. And it was, of course, grist to their anti-Guardian mill. We sought out Winnick. He took the view that things said in private should stay private. No matter. No doubt it all came over loud and clear at GCHQ. • When the folk who run the world gathered at the Mandela memorial this week, Tony Blair was there. He wasn't part of the notorious selfie taken by Obama, PM Dave and the prime minister of Denmark. But Blair was there of right; record-breaking ex prime minister, globetrotting worldfixer without portfolio. And yet current opinion is rarely kind to him. Can anyone fix that? The Tony Blair Faith Foundation seeks an external affairs manager, to make us think afresh about the outfit's work and maybe they'll show the value to a troubled world of Mr Tony. Nick Clegg got himself a spin doctor the other day, so help is out there. And some people will do anything for money. • Barack Obama worked his magic at the Mandela memorial service and showed once again how he was able to charm the world. Other US presidents haven't been so successful. Paul Flynn, the veteran Labour MP for Newport West, told a Cardiff meeting an anecdote originating from Gerald Kaufman, now a grizzled old-timer but once a special adviser to Harold Wilson at No 10 in the late 1960s. The Vietnam war was expanding and the US was being sucked ever more deeply into the mangrove swamps. President Lyndon Johnson phoned Wilson, desperate to secure British backing for the war – in the form of British troops. Wilson refused. Johnson tried again – what about just one platoon, he begged. No, again. In desperation he asked if the British military could at least provide a band of bagpipers to welcome US forces landing at Da Nang military airport in South Vietnam. No! End of conversation. Johnson had a rougher charm, but with Harold charm wasn't enough. • Mutterings within the British Humanist Association, which sent out a fetching card with just the word Christmas on the front. Cue indignation from some members, calling in to protest. They didn't read the very small print on the back. Turn the card upside down and it reads Saturnalia, ie the Roman winter festival of misrule. Always read the small print. • Finally, congratulations to the space scientist Maggie Aderin-Pocock, who has been chosen to host that national TV institution, The Sky At Night. She will join when the programme, whose future once seemed in doubt, secures a 30-minute slot on BBC4. A research fellow at University College London, she is something of a diplomat. "It's a huge honour to follow in the footsteps of Sir Patrick Moore, a passionate advocate of the wonders of the night sky," she said. And she is way too polite to point out that Sir Patrick was a dreadful old racist who talked of Britain being "swamped by parasites", opined that the "only good kraut is a dead kraut", and aligned himself with a slew of nasty rightwing anti-immigrant groups. The idea of being succeeded by a black British woman of Nigerian origin would probably have him spinning in his grave. So, well done Maggie. Well done BBC. Twitter: @hugh_muir