Andrew Parker, head of MI5, at an intelligence and security committee hearing on the Snowden revelations. Photograph: Reuters Tv/Reuters When the home secretary, Theresa May, appears before the home affairs committee on Monday, she is liable to be grilled as to why she is refusing to allow the head of MI5 to give evidence to the committee about Edward Snowden's revelations. She will probably give the committee short shrift. None of your business, she is likely to reply. A matter for the intelligence and security committee (ISC), which is already conducting its own inquiry into the subject. In theory at least she is on strong ground. As of this year, the ISC is no longer a creature of government, but a committee of parliament. Its members are not appointed by the prime minister (although he retains a veto), but by parliament, and the committee does not report exclusively to the prime minister, but also to parliament. In addition, the committee has some welcome new powers and a wider remit. The struggle to render the security and intelligence services accountable to parliament has been a long one. When I first joined the home affairs committee 20 years ago, I asked the then home secretary, Ken Clarke, if we could interview the then head of MI5, Stella Rimington. Clarke refused. However, it was rumoured that Rimington, in an effort to improve the image of the service, had been privately briefing newspaper editors. I rang a couple who confirmed they had met her. How come, I asked Clarke, when he next came before the committee, the head of MI5 was permitted to meet with the unelected, but not with the elected? At which point he came out with his hands up. Half a dozen of us were invited to lunch with her. Much excitement was generated. Cars were sent from MI5 to collect us. Inevitably, word of the meeting leaked and a posse of photographers chased us across central London. The meeting itself was banal enough. No secrets were imparted, but the ice had been broken. For the first time there had been dialogue between the head of MI5 and elected members of parliament. In the years that followed, successive heads of MI5 made a point of meeting informally with members of the home affairs committee, but until this year the principle of accountability to parliament was never conceded. In 1994, for the first time in our history, the security and intelligence services were placed on a statutory footing, and the intelligence and security committee, headed by the former defence secretary Tom King, was set up to monitor them. This was not the result of a sudden burst of transparency by the government, but a requirement of our membership of the European Union. The great weakness of the committee was that it was a tool of government, not of parliament, with limited powers. After Labour was elected in May 1997 I continued to pursue the matter. When I suggested to Tony Blair that the committee should be accountable to parliament and not to him, he laughed and said: "I suppose that was the line we took in opposition." It was indeed. In the end he did make one small concession – parliament would have an annual debate on the security services. In the event it was left to David Cameron and the coalition to go where New Labour feared to tread and grant the ISC some long overdue new powers. The current inquiry, prompted by the Snowden revelations, will be the first test of these new arrangements. It remains to be seen whether the committee – and indeed the intelligence agencies – will rise to the occasion. If they don't, then ministers must not be surprised if they face renewed demands from the home affairs committee – and perhaps from the foreign affairs committee – for their own inquiries.