Andrew Miller, CEO, Guardian Media Group (GMG), today announces a series of executive management changes that will further solidify the Guardian's position as a leading global news organisation. Designed to build on the organisation's ongoing strong performance – which has seen digital revenues grow by almost 30% in the last financial year and losses significantly reduced across the Guardian News and Media (GNM) business – today's changes reflect the increased opportunities for growth and investment both in the UK and globally. David Pemsel, currently GNM's Chief Commercial Officer, takes on increased accountability for the GNM business in the newly-created role of Deputy Chief Executive, GNM. Pemsel will assume overall responsibility for all commercial operations in the UK, the US and Australia and, in so doing, will integrate and lead all three businesses into one truly global organisation. He will grow the strong domestic functions – Marketing and Audience Insight, Advertising Sales, Guardian Jobs, Guardian Labs, Consumer Revenues, Membership, and Commercial Delivery – into global functions, supporting the work of GNM's international businesses. As GNM continues to develop future growth opportunities, Tony Danker – who most recently led the successful launch of Guardian Australia and continues to lead the International, Rights and Syndication teams – will take on additional responsibilities in a broader development role for GNM. As Director, International and Partnerships, he will pursue GNM's next wave of international expansion and will manage its global partnerships with leading digital platforms. Together with the GMG Board, GNM Executive and Editorial colleagues, Danker will also identify critical new investment areas. Finally, Michael Bloom, currently CEO, Guardian US, will leave the company to pursue other opportunities, and will stay on through to the end of January 2014 to guarantee a smooth transition. David Pemsel will work closely with the US commercial team, to ensure the company is commercially focused on a unified global offering. Commenting on the changes, Andrew Miller said: "GNM is really firing on all cylinders, and we are continuing to accelerate the growth of our digital revenues and build our global audience at a pace that outstrips our competitors. In order to capitalise on the momentum we have created, now is the right time to integrate our commercial operations across the UK, US and Australia in line with our global strategy and ambitions. I believe David Pemsel will be able to maximise the huge potential we see in both the US and Australia, while Tony Danker will be able to create new opportunities and partnerships for us around the world. "We'd like to thank and recognise Michael Bloom for successfully steering Guardian US through its first two years. He helped build the business from a start-up operation to a much-respected media brand in the highly-competitive US market, with traffic growth of over 46% and revenue up 75% year-on-year. As we continue to grow we will focus on driving one global commercial strategy, to build on our enviable position as the world's third biggest English-language newspaper website and as one of its most trusted sources of news content." - ends - For further information please contact: Guardian News and Media Press Office +44 20 3353 3696 media.enquiries@theguardian.com About Guardian News and Media Guardian News and Media (GNM) publishes theguardian.com, the third largest English-speaking newspaper website in the world (comScore, October 2013). Since launching its US and Australia digital editions in 2011 and 2013 respectively, traffic from outside of the UK now represents over two-thirds of the Guardian's total digital audience. In the UK, GNM publishes the Guardian newspaper six days a week and the world's oldest Sunday newspaper, The Observer. The newspapers were this year named the most trustworthy, accurate and reliable newspapers in the UK. The Guardian, which was first published in 1821, is most recently renowned for its agenda-setting NSA and GCHQ revelations following disclosures by whistleblower Edward Snowden, its trailblazing partnership with WikiLeaks in 2010, and its globally acclaimed investigation into phone hacking and the launch of its groundbreaking digital-first strategy in 2011. David Pemsel David has worked in many senior roles within advertising and marketing for the past 20 years. He was Head of Marketing Communications at Hutchinson Telecom, before going on to become one of Ogilvy and Mather's youngest Account Directors. In his next role at the fledgling St Lukes, he helped to build it into a top 10 UK agency and win agency of the year in 1997. He was then headhunted by Elizabeth Murdoch to launch Shine Entertainment in 2000. He joined ITV in 2005 as Marketing Director, and became Group Marketing Director in 2007. He was promoted onto the ITV PLC Executive Committee in 2009. David joined Guardian News and Media in 2010, and became Chief Commercial Officer, taking on responsibility for all revenues, marketing and insight. He is a fellow of the Marketing Society, Council member of the Marketing Group of Great and Britain and a Voting Member of BAFTA. Tony Danker Tony joined Guardian News and Media in 2010 and was responsible for the Guardian's long-term strategic review and for the development of the Guardian US strategy. Tony was appointed International Director in 2012 and is responsible for expanding the Guardian's global footprint and launching and operating the Guardian in new markets. He oversees rights and content acquisition, global content sales and key partnerships. Prior to joining GNM, Tony spent two years in public policy and was a Special Adviser in HM Treasury. Before that he spent 10 years at McKinsey and Company, with expertise in government and organisational consulting as well as communications. In 2004 he completed the mid-career Masters in Public Administration at the Harvard Kennedy School of Government.