11.24am GMT Could Edward Snowden really be given an amnesty? The prospect comes from comments made by Richard Ledgett, the NSA official in charge of assessing the alleged damage caused by the whistleblower’s leaks. Asked by CBS News about his thoughts on giving Snowden an amnesty, he said: My personal view is, yes, it’s worth having a conversation about. I would need assurances that the remainder of the data could be secured, and my bar for those assurances would be very high. It would be more than just an assertion on his part. Is that a unanimous feeling, he was asked. “It’s not unanimous,” Ledgett replied. The programme then asked General Keith Alexander, the NSA’s director, for his view. He said: This is analogous to a hostage taker taking 50 people hostage, shooting 10 and then say, "If you give me full amnesty I'll let the other 40 go." What do you do? Asked to come down on one side or the other, he answered: I think people have to be held accountable for their actions. Because what we don't want is the next person to do the same thing, race off to Hong Kong and to Moscow with another set of data knowing they can strike the same deal. Here is the full programme and a transcript. Alexander is of course more senior than Ledgett. But in a few months he is due to step down – as his deputy, John Inglis, is doing imminently. And Ledgett is rumoured to be taking Inglis’s place. In fact he had at one point been rumoured to replace Alexander, but since it seems the US will not now be splitting the NSA from the military cyber-attack specialists Cyber Command, it is unlikely a civilian, such as Ledgett, could be given the top job. But a promotion to No 2 at the NSA for Ledgett could potentially mean the amnesty proposal becomes a formal offer. Even so, assurances that “the remainder of the data could be secured” could be difficult for Snowden to give. He told the New York Times in October that he did not take any of his surveillance documents to Russia, where he has received a year-long temporary asylum. Alan Rusbridger, the editor of the Guardian, told British MPs when he appeared before them earlier this month that Snowden’s files had been handed to his paper, the Washington Post, plus journalists Glenn Greenwald and Laura Poitras. In June, the US Justice Department filed a criminal complaint charging the 30-year old former contractor with theft of government property, unauthorised communication of national defence information and “wilful communication of classified communications intelligence information to an unauthorised person”, although he has not yet been indicted. Any amnesty would have to come through the Justice Department, which did not respond to a request for comment from my colleague Spencer Ackerman. A State Department spokeswoman told Ackerman that Ledgett was stating a “personal view”: Our position has not changed. Mr Snowden is facing very serious charges and should return to the United States to face them. Updated at 11.28am GMT