We're taking stock here at the Weekly. 2013 was an astonishing year, and the expanded holiday edition of the newspaper making its way to you now captures those months, recounting and analysing them in a very global, and very uniquely Guardian, way. The paper kicks off with Guardian editor Alan Rusbridger reflecting on whistleblower Edward Snowden and the surveillance story, which defined this year's news agenda. Inside, Guardian diplomatic editor Julian Borger puts the NSA tale into a global context. Following on is analysis of the year from the Guardian's award-winning correspondents: Simon Hoggart on Britain; Ian Black on the Middle East; Ed Pilkington on America; Tania Branigan on China. We haven't forgotten Europe, where Ian Traynor picks up on the themes for 2014 and Shaun Walker takes on Russia. Jonathan Watts wraps up South America, and quite a job he had, with so many countries to consider! David Smith weighs in on wondrous Africa. And we're delighted that Barney Ronay makes a special appearance at the back of the paper to sum up the year in sport. It's our most ambitious year-in-review package ever, with 15 pages of bespoke content in a 64-page edition that we hope will keep you reading well into the holidays. It's available now online via our digital edition, if you are so inclined. The year-end analysis is in addition to our usual offering of news from around the world. We visit Canada, where a claim to the north pole is being prepared, Australia, where asylum seekers face tough new rules, and touch base with many countries in between. North Korean power moves, German coalitions, Mexican drugs war crusaders, and infuriated Egyptians all find a home on our news pages. We also offer up an expanded Comment & Debate section, including fine writing from Giles Fraser, former canon chancellor of St Paul's Cathedral, on the nature of Christmas. Guardian stalwart Simon Jenkins writes on cannabis, and Polly Toynbee on teen pregnancy. Our editorial leader wonders what now for the ANC after Nelson Mandela's death, and Ian Jack looks at the week in which we woke up and fell asleep to Mandela. These Comment pages get the job done. If you run out of reading, we've got the King William's College Quiz to baffle your brain. The Weekly editorial team managed a collective two answers to these many questions. Good luck in besting our result! We'll run the quiz answers when they become available, which is usually late in January, so there's plenty of time to puzzle over this puzzle. One of the bits of this expanded holiday edition that I'm most pleased with is our GuardianWitness project. We asked you, our readers, where you read your Guardian Weekly. So far, more than 50 of you have sent in photos or words to illustrate where and when you enjoy the paper. We've included an offering of those images over two pages towards the back of our holiday edition. And there are more photos online, which you can see by clicking here. It's not too late to contribute. We hope to publish more images in the new year. The Weekly team will now take a holiday break, then return to produce the 3 January issue, which is the next newspaper you will receive. No matter where you read the paper, or when, I'd like to take this opportunity to thank you for your support. It's a privilege and a delight to be editor of such a loved publication. If you celebrate a holiday at this time of year, I hope it is peaceful and contented. Would you like to change your delivery address? Your email address? Suspend delivery? You can manage your account online by clicking here. Are you a subscriber looking for our digital edition? If so, click here. That digital edition can also be viewed by subscribers on iPads, iPhones, Kindle Fires, Android tablets and smartphones. Log in on the device to the digital edition and the technology should take you to the correct format. Want to know more about the Weekly? Check out our frequently asked questions.