8.48pm GMT Here is a summary of tonight's key events: • Sir David Omand, the former head of GCHQ, claimed that mass surveillance was not being undertaken by the intelligence agencies in the UK and US - instead bulk access was what spy services had, a very different thing. The crowd at parliament's committee room six seemed sceptical about this distinction, which Omand did not fully explain. Omand said bulk access was necessary to stop terrorists and international criminals. Jimmy Wales of Wikipedia said the choice was not between bulk access or the criminals and terrorists running wild - instead certain private communications could be accessed on a proper legal basis. • Omand said that everybody could have known that practices such as GCHQ's fibre-optic-cable-tapping programme Tempora were taking place if they read the right books. But Guardian editor Alan Rusbridger said Omand might have known, but parliament had not known and neither had the US tech companies. Omand expressed scepticism about the last point.  • George Howarth, a member of the UK intelligence and security committee that supervises the security services, said he was the most incompetent person regarding technology that he knew. Rusbridger said that was "slightly troubling".  • Howarth said that although the main questions his committee asked the spy chiefs at their recent unprecedented session were given to the chiefs in advance, the supplementary questions "were not scripted".  • Omand said that when security agencies created a back-door key to access information they secured it again with stronger encryption than had been there previously - although he admitted "I shouldn't really talk about this".  • Omand said spy chiefs should not be made accountable to parliament. They should be accountable to ministers.  • Wales said the public needed to know whether intelligence agencies were reading their emails and listening to their phone calls. That would help "adversaries", he said, "but that's tough - too bad".  • Labour home affairs spokeswoman Diana Johnson said the ISC should become a proper select committee and would then be able to offer full protection to whistleblowers giving evidence. Howarth thought the committee should continue to change incrementally and the interception of communications commissioner should be more open. Legislation needed to be consolidated, he said.  • Labour's Katy Clark suggested Tempora might not be lawful.  • Howarth said he knew with absolute certainty that the programmes revealed by Edward Snowden had helped foil terrorist attacks. 