9.50am GMT Welcome to our hub for all Edward Snowden, NSA and GCHQ-related developments around the world. As arguments rage over how much of our day to day life should be monitored in the name of security, we'll be tracking the growing global debate about privacy in the digital age. We'd like to know what you think about the whole NSA story, what you're worried about – and any new areas you'd like to read more about. Good morning. Here are the headlines: • The top leaders from world’s biggest technology companies called on the US to "move aggressively" to reform the National Security Agency’s controversial surveillance operations after discussions with Barack Obama on Tuesday, resisting attempts by the White House to portray the encounter as covering a range of broader priorities. • In an angry exchange with Barack Obama, Angela Merkel compared the snooping practices of the US with those of the Stasi, the ubiquitous and all-powerful secret police of the communist dictatorship in East Germany, where she grew up, the New York Times has reported. • The heads of the security services should not be directly accountable to parliament, the former GCHQ chief has said. Sir David Omand said they should make more public appearances to make it easier to see "the kind of people they are", but that accountability was a different matter and would "build up the agency heads into something they are not". Omand was speaking at a debate on spying held in parliament on Tuesday evening, and was joined by Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales, the Guardian's editor-in-chief Alan Rusbridger and Labour MP George Howarth, a member of the intelligence and security committee, which oversees the work of the UK security services. Shadow home affairs minister Diana Johnson and her Labour colleague Katy Clark also took part in the debate on Tuesday evening. You can read my live blog of the event here. • Edward Snowden offered to help Brazil investigate US spying on its soil in exchange for political asylum, in an open letter from the NSA whistleblower to the Brazilian people published by the Folha de S Paulo newspaper. I'll have live coverage of all developments here throughout the day.