Note: We've updated this article with commenters' suggestions for the best and worst of BTL. Scroll down to see their nominations. With 2014 just around the corner, we’re taking a look back at 2013 and highlighting the most memorable conversations and debates. We’re shining the spotlight on the most popular comments and commenters, as well as the stories that moved Guardian readers to post so prolifically. Below you’ll find a list of superlatives, from “most talked about story” to “commenter with the most free time”. The only superlative we haven’t announced is commenter of the year, which we’re leaving up to you. Comment in the space below and tell us which member of the BTL community impressed you the most this year. We also want to know what moments stand out from 2013: a particular debate? Snarky comeback? Surprising candor? We'll update this post with readers' nominations. Our commenters have racked up 9,035,694 posts in 2013. Here are some highlights: Most talked about story: “Edward Snowden: the whistleblower behind the NSA surveillance revelations”  garnered 6,194 comments. The Guardian’s big reveal of Snowden as the NSA whistleblower sparked the most voracious conversation below the line this year. Some called him a traitor, some a hero. Some railed against the United States for surveying its citizens, while others criticised the Guardian for releasing government information. The article also gave us the following comment, which was one of the most recommended this year: Biggest conversation starter: Alex Foster, whose comment on “NHS private sector climbdown a 'humiliating U-turn', says Labour”  got an impressive 170 replies, many about the benefits of turning to the UK’s National Health Service instead of opting for a (pricier) private hospital. His opinion touched off a heated debate, excerpted below: Runners up:TimJag sparked off an 89-comment debate about civil liberties with this comment on the Guardian's very first NSA story, "NSA collecting phone records of millions of Verizon customers daily." And on a more serious note, Storm's call for spoiler alerts in this review of After Earth got 84 responses from fellow commenters. One highlight: Most popular comment: webweasel, whose comment on “Microsoft takes $900m charge on Surface RT tablets” got a startling 19,527 recommendations Most savvy commenter: Kizbot, who had 39 picked comments this year (be sure to check out her BTL profile). A 'picked comment' is a badge given by a Guardian staff member to highlight insightful (or witty) comments in a thread.  Commenters who left their mark: Pagey, who made 12,725 comments this year. Runners up:MickGJ made 9,646 comments in 2013, and polystyrene made 9,511. Our BTL profile ofTheGreatRonRafferty received 345 comments – the most out of any article in the series. Could it be his dinner party offering of "haddock, chips and mushy peas" that got him so much attention? With over 9m (yes, that's nine million) comments on the Guardian, taking stock of the year's best moments is a daunting task. We know that numbers, like the ones we mention above (and were pulled by Guardian data guru Julian Fitzell), only tell part of the story. It's impossible to sum up the voices, quirks and personalities of the thousands of readers who make up the BTL community in one post, which is why we've been highlighting users from all different sections of the Guardian in this weekly series, including: Below the line with Parisa: 'I spar with mostly everyone!' Below the Line with Bjerkley: 'I'm not a koala, for a start' Below the Line with kristinekochanski: 'I love the Proclaimers' Check out the rest of this year's BTL profiles here. As we've said, these highlights are only a fraction of the best moments from the Guardian comment threads. We need you to help us tell the whole story. What else should we add to this highlight reel? Snarkiest retort? Most improved commenter? Add your suggestions in the thread below and make sure to include links. We're updating this post with your contributions all week. We've pulled your choices best and worst moments of the year above the line, as well as your picks for commenter of the year. Highlights: (And yes, he meant Harry Smith). Lowlights and pet peeves: And now, here are some of the nominees for commenter of the year. We can't embed all of them into this post, but don't worry, we're taking note of everyone's suggestions: