Bulk phone collection We recommend that, as a general rule, and without senior policy review, the government should not be permitted to collect and store all mass, undigested, non-public personal information about individuals to enable future queries and data-mining for foreign intelligence purposes. We recommend that legislation should be enacted that terminates the storage of bulk telephony meta-data by the government under section 215, and transitions as soon as reasonably possible to a system in which such meta-data is held instead either by private providers or by a private third party. Access to such data should be permitted only with a section 215 order from the Foreign Intellience Surveillance Court... NSA collecting phone records of millions of Verizon customers daily The National Security Agency is currently collecting the telephone records of millions of US customers of Verizon, one of America's largest telecoms providers, under a top secret court order issued in April. The order, a copy of which has been obtained by the Guardian, requires Verizon on an "ongoing, daily basis" to give the NSA information on all telephone calls in its systems, both within the US and between the US and other countries. – The Guardian, 6 June 2013 Surveillance of foreign leaders We recommend that the President should create a new process requiring high-level approval of all sensitive intelligence requirements and the methods the Intelligence Community will use to meet them. This process should, among other things identify both the uses and limits of surveillance on foreign leaders and in foreign nations. NSA monitored calls of 35 world leaders after US official handed over contacts The National Security Agency monitored the phone conversations of 35 world leaders after being given the numbers by an official in another US government department, according to a classified document provided by whistleblower Edward Snowden. – The Guardian, 24 October 2013 Merkel's phone may have been monitored 'for over 10 years' New claims emerged over the extent to which US intelligence agencies have been monitoring the mobile phone of Angela Merkel. The allegations were made after German secret service officials were already preparing to travel to Washington to seek explanations into the alleged surveillance of its chancellor. – The Guardian, 26 October 2013 Internet encryption We recommend that, regarding encryption, the US government should fully support and not undermine efforts to create encryption standards[and] not in any way subvert, undermine, weaken, or make vulnerable generally available commercial software. Revealed: how US and UK spy agencies defeat internet surveillance US and British intelligence agencies have successfully cracked much of the online encryption relied upon by hundreds of millions of people to protect the privacy of their personal data, online transactions and emails, according to top-secret documents revealed by Snowden. – The Guardian, 5 September 2013 Searches of Americans' data The government may not search the contents of communications acquired under section 702, or under any other authority covered by this recommendation, in an effort to identify communications of particular United States persons, except (a) when the information is necessary to prevent a threat of death or serious bodily harm, or (b) when the government obtains a warrant based on probable cause to believe that the United States person is planning or is engaged in acts of international terrorism. NSA loophole allows warrantless search for US citizens' emails and phone calls The National Security Agency has a secret backdoor into its vast databases under a legal authority enabling it to search for US citizens’ email and phone calls without a warrant, according to a top-secret document passed to the Guardian. – The Guardian, 9 August 2013