A child wears a mask in Tiananmen Square during one of several bouts of toxic smog in the Chinese capital. Photograph: Feng Li/Getty Images China's capital began the year choked in a toxic smog that shrouded buildings and strafed throats. The frightening hike in its persistent pollution – soon nicknamed the airpocalypse – turned a long-running problem into a source of real anger. The political scene was also veiled by haze as analysts sought to establish the outlines of the new leadership's plans for the country. By the end of the year, things looked a little clearer in Beijing, though off-the-scale pollution had spread north to Harbin and south to Shanghai. Authorities had finally faced up to the pollution problem and vowed bolder measures to curtail it – albeit still far short of what environmentalists said was needed. And if Xi Jinping's ideal of the China Dream – lauded on billboards around the capital – still remained inchoate, there seemed to be a greater sense of clarity and purpose. Politics and pollution defined much of the year, though there was plenty of other news along the way, some long-planned – such as China's launch of its moon rover mission – and some simply startling: notably the Guardian's revelation that NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden was holed up in Hong Kong. In spring, 200 died and 1,000 were seriously injured in April when an earthquake hit Ya'an in Sichuan – the same province devastated by a huge shock in 2008. In autumn, at least 42 people were killed by giant hornets in Shaanxi province. Manmade disasters took their toll too; 62 died when a leaking oil pipeline exploded in Qingdao in November. The smog underlined the unsustainability of China's headlong development and the sense that economic growth, which in any case is slowing, is no longer enough to keep many in China from chafing at the social and environmental costs. There was similar ire at the latest in the recurrent food safety scandals – this time involving rat meat passed off as lamb. And a spate of stories about the abuse or neglect of children raised concerns about social change. Even the behaviour of China's tourists led to a bout of national soul-searching, prompting officials to issue an etiquette guide for travellers. Domestic movie hits – Lost In Thailand and Tiny Times – entertained many but left others fretting about popular culture's vulgarity and materialism. But the biggest concern for many remained the country's endemic corruption. Xi has vowed to tackle both "flies and tigers" in a drive against corruption and extravagance that has been more intense and protracted than most expected. It also closed the door on disgraced politician Bo Xilai's career, though he fought back against the charges of corruption and abuse of power. However, when a senior leader vowed "unprecedented reform" at the autumn's key political meeting – the third plenum – he was greeted with scepticism. It is unclear how reform will be implemented but key pledges included relaxation of the "one-child policy", greater freedom for farmers to sell or mortgage their land and move to cities, and the abolition of the re-education-through-labour system. As the year drew to a close it was matters outside China's borders that dominated, with the reigniting of a long-running Sino-Japanese row over islands in the East China Sea. Photograph: Kyodo/Reuters "The third plenum is the most important development this year," said Zhang Ming, a political scientist at Renmin University. He sees the policy changes as evidence of Xi wanting reform and the leadership responding to public pressure. "The meaningful reform is replacing allocation of resources by power with allocation of resources by the market," he said. Independent Beijing-based scholar Chen Ziming said there was more economic reform than in previous years but reduced efforts at social reform and no interest in political change. "Their reform is very different from our understanding of reform," he said. Despite the top-down anti-corruption campaign, citizens who called for officials to declare their assets were arrested. Among them was Xu Zhiyong, a well-known legal activist, who was accused of "gathering a crowd to disturb order in a public place", despite being under house arrest. "If you look on the ground, I don't see many areas where there are visible improvements [in rights]", said Nicholas Bequelin, senior Asia researcher at Human Rights Watch. "The abolition of reform through labour is definitely a positive development … but large numbers of people who were warehoused in certain kinds of facilities will likely be warehoused in other kinds of facilities." A crackdown on internet "rumours" saw the detention of a 16-year-old who criticised police under new rules that allow users to be jailed for up to three years for widely seen or forwarded posts. This time officials targeted opinion leaders too – parading one outspoken businessman, Xue Manzi, on television, where he confessed to "irresponsibility in spreading information online". The year began with a row over censorship at one of China's best respected papers – Southern Weekly. The Bloomberg and New York Times websites also remained blocked following their stories on the wealth of senior leaders' families, and journalists were left waiting for visas. In Xinjiang, Bequelin added, it was clear that the situation had deteriorated. Scores have died in violence there this year and the tensions between authorities and Uighur Muslims – some of whom seek a separate state – spilled out of the north-western region to the capital in November. Three Uighurs died when their car ploughed through crowds and exploded in Tiananmen Square in what authorities called a terrorist attack by separatists, though others suggested it was linked to a raid on a mosque in the driver's hometown. And in Tibet, self-immolations continued, although there were fewer than in 2012. As the year drew to a close it was matters outside China's borders that dominated, with the long-running Sino-Japanese territorial row in the East China Sea reigniting as China announced it had established an air defence identification zone. Other countries already have such zones, but the rules governing China's and its inclusion of disputed islands also claimed – and administered – by Japan upped the ante. "There are two things we have learned this year," argued Steve Tsang, an expert on China at the University of Nottingham. "One is how strongly Xi Jinping has consolidated his position. The other is the end of the peaceful rise and the beginning of an assertive China." A famous maxim from Deng Xiaoping urged China to hide its light and bide its time. "They are not hiding behind anything any longer," Tsang said.