Russian president Vladimir Putin is hoisted high during an annual gay pride parade in Amsterdam. Photograph: Koen Van Weel/EPA When Vladimir Putin kicks back on New Year's Eve with a glass of Russian-made champagne, and reflects on the year behind him, he is likely to feel rather pleased with himself at the way his foreign policy initiatives have gone in 2013. Although there has been a steady increase of tension with Europe and the US, leading to a number of crisis points, the Kremlin has been able to score a number of diplomatic victories, many of them utterly unexpected. From the extraordinary effort that saw Putin take to the pages of the New York Times as the voice of restraint and international law, persuading the US not to launch a military attack on Syria and succeeding in getting a dubious plan to remove chemical weapons from the country off the ground, to the equally surreal spectacle of Russia taking the moral high ground over surveillance and spying by sheltering Edward Snowden from the long arm of US retribution, the Kremlin has scored points in the unlikeliest of places. As the year drew to a close, Putin pulled off another spectacular, prising neighbouring Ukraine from the embrace of the European Union and yanking it back towards Moscow. At a summit in Crimea in September, the Kremlin's point man on Ukraine spewed dark threats about what would happen if Ukraine ignored Russia, and was laughed out of the room. Two months later, his wishes were fulfilled. It's almost funny when you think about it – all those European bureaucrats beavering away over the minutiae of the trade deal, and then along comes Putin with a sack of cash and scuppers the whole thing in a matter of minutes. Not even a sack of cash, in fact, but the promise of a sack of cash. And indeed, not so much as the promise of a sack of cash, but the threat of a lack of a sack of cash in the case of noncompliance. Whether any of these things will actually prove to be long-lasting victories, or whether they are merely point-scoring that will bring Russia more headaches in the long run, is an open question. What the Russians lack is soft power, as the response on the streets of Ukraine to news of the deal illustrated again. Even with the disasters that have befallen the EU in recent years, it turns out that moving closer to Brussels is still an attractive prospect for many in eastern Europe, as a symbolic aspiration and a beacon of values, whereas the Kremlin's icy embrace simply is not. More generally, relations with the US and Europe spiralled, with the values gap ever bigger and the rhetoric on both sides ever more spiky, while still refraining from going entirely over the precipice. The US banned Russian officials implicated in the death of whistleblowing lawyer Sergei Magnitsky from travelling to America; Russia, aware that a reciprocal ban would hardly be devastating for US officials, added in a ban on the adoption of Russian orphans by US citizens for good measure. The Russia-Netherlands year of culture was marred by all manner of political obstacles. Putin was booed and jeered over Russia's controversial new anti-gay legislation when he travelled to Amsterdam,the countries traded accusations that their respective deputy ambassadors were beaten up in each others' capital cities, and the Netherlands took Russia to an international tribunal over its seizure of the Dutch-flagged Greenpeace ship, the Arctic Sunrise. Britain should watch out – 2014 is the Russia-UK year of culture. At home, Putin has pulled back from a full-scale crackdown, with laws branding NGOs as "foreign agents" only partially implemented, opposition leader Alexei Navalny spared jail and allowed to run in Moscow mayoral elections, and no mass arrests of opponents, though harsh trials of those arrested after a Moscow protest the day before his inauguration drag on interminably. The so-called Bolotnaya protesters receive little media attention, but the Kremlin has been genuinely shocked by the negative publicity that its laws against "homosexual propaganda" have received, and is furious that the gay issue could dominate Putin's pet project, the Sochi Olympics in February.