5.30pm ET How will today's report affect the trajectory of legislation currently before Congress to rein in the NSA? The Review Group stops shorter than civil libertarian groups want on the most domestically controversial aspect of the NSA’s bulk surveillance: the bulk collection of all US phone data for five years. But the big question, writes Guardian national security editor Spencer Ackerman (@attackerman), is "whether the report provides President Obama with cover to endorse legislation pushed by privacy advocates to stop that surveillance": The language is tricky here. The Review Group endorses reforming Section 215 of the Patriot Act so that the government can only collect phone or other data pursuant to a Fisa Court order “about particular individuals.” And it can only get that data if it has “reasonable grounds” to believe the information sought is “relevant to an authorized investigation intended” to stop terrorism or spying on the US. Plus, the order has to be “reasonable in focus, scope, and breadth.” That sounds similar to the “reasonable, articulable suspicion” grounds the NSA currently uses to search through its databases of US call information. Only here, the big shift proposed would be to have a “private party” like a telecom hold the data, not NSA. Put differently, bulk collection by the NSA would be replaced with bulk storage by… someone else, probably the phone company; with the NSA able to search through the data. It’s not a total equivalence, since the Fisa Court order for the data would effectively mean a court would approve the searches of the data at the point when NSA wants it from the phone companies. That’s a possible new safeguard, even if it’s a quasi safeguard. But here’s where the devil is in the details. The NSA wants that data stored for three to five years. Right now the phone companies store it for up to 18 months. And civil libertarians object to having the phone companies act as middlemen for mass surveillance. “Mass surveillance is still heinous, even if private company servers are holding the data instead of government data centers,” Kurt Opsahl of the Electronic Frontier Foundation tells Spencer, whose report continues: “It’s not a solution to simply repackage the bulk collection under private control,” said Alex Abdo of the ACLU. But the point at which the rubber hits the road, politically, is whether the telecom-storage proposal works as a compromise for the authors of the USA Freedom Act, the major legislative proposal in the House and Senate to end bulk suspicionless surveillance. If so, that could clear the way for Obama to endorse it, thereby allowing it to move in the Senate and probably ensure passage in the House through a coalition of Democrats and privacy-minded Republicans -- even at the cost of civil libertarian opposition. One of the bill’s authors is cautious so far. Patrick Leahy, a stalwart Obama ally and just as stalwart a bulk-collection critic, is the chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee. In a statement, Leahy said the recommendation “align[s]” with the USA Freedom Act. But just as the Review Group stopped short of ending bulk surveillance on domestic call data, Leahy stopped short of calling for the report’s full implementation. Instead, Leahy said he had invited the Review Group to testify before the committee, and he’ll “look forward to discussing their important recommendations.”