Vladimir Putin's outspoken opponent Mikhail Khodorkovsky could become the latest high-profile prisoner in Russia to be set free after the president said he intended to pardon him. The surprise announcement came despite long-running rumours in Moscow that investigators were preparing a third court case against Khodorkovsky – formerly the richest person in Russia – who has been in jail since 2003 and was due for release next August. The former oligarch, who became a staunch Kremlin critic after being convicted of economic crimes in trials that many believe were politically motivated, is seen as a potential political threat to Putin if released. Khodorkovsky has previously said he would not ask for a pardon, as it would imply an admittance of guilt. Putin, however, said he had recently received a request signed by Khodorkovsky. Speaking at the conclusion of a four-hour press conference in Moscow, the Russian president said: "Not long ago he appealed to me for a pardon. He has already spent 10 years behind bars – it's a serious punishment. He mentions humanitarian considerations, as his mother is ill. Given all this, the correct decision should be taken and a decree on his pardoning will be signed very soon." Lawyers for the former oil tycoon said they had not heard of any such request. Khodorkovsky did not fall under the terms of a wide-ranging amnesty passed by Russia's parliament on Wednesday, which is set to see two jailed members of the punk band Pussy Riot released early and the Greenpeace Arctic 30 allowed to leave Russia in the coming days. The sudden bout of clemency has been linked with an attempt to boost Russia's image in the runup to the Winter Olympics, due to be held in Sochi in February. The move towards freeing Khodorkovsky nevertheless comes as a surprise. When Putin came to power in 2000, he offered an informal deal to Russia's oligarchs – they could keep their wealth, but they were not to dabble in politics. Khodorkovsky broke the deal. Keen to turn his company Yukos into a modern, international business, he made allegations of corruption in the Kremlin and funded opposition political parties. Many Russians still regard the oligarchs with distaste, as they made enormous wealth during the 90s while most of the populace was mired in poverty, but Khodorkovsky's decade in prison has had a redeeming effect. Amnesty International has declared him a prisoner of conscience, and there is sympathy – especially among the new urban middle class – towards his critiques of the current political system. His carefully observed prison sketches are published regularly in Russian magazine the New Times. Vladimir Putin gestures during his annual press conference in Moscow. Photograph: Alexey Semenov/Demotix/Corbis He has said that if and when he is released, he simply wants to spend time with his family, but many see in Khodorkovsky someone who could eventually unite the fractured opposition to Putin. When asked at the press conference if he thought the two-year jail sentence given to two members of Pussy Riot was too harsh, and whether as a father he felt sorry for the jailed young mothers, he said: "I feel sorry not for that, but for their disgraceful behaviour, which I think degrades the dignity of women … They crossed all boundaries." He also said that while he supported environmental organisations, the Greenpeace protest at the Prirazlomnaya rig was unacceptable: "It was either an attempt at getting PR, or an attempt at blackmail and extortion, or they were carrying out somebody's order to interfere with our work." Putin's marathon press conferences have become something of a tradition, and more than 1,300 journalists were accredited this year. He was asked questions on everything from geopolitical dilemmas to local issues. Many regional journalists see the conference as their only chance to get their local problems across, and arrived armed with signs and banners to catch the president's eye. One woman even brought a furry toy which she waved in the air until Putin asked her what it was. "It's a yeti, and I would like to give to you as a present," she said. Since the format does not provide for follow-up questions, Putin was able to bat away the few combative questions with ease. He spoke at length about Edward Snowden, the former NSA contractor who has been given temporary asylum in Russia, insisting that Russian intelligence has never worked with Snowden and that he has never met Snowden in person. Link to video: Vladimir Putin on Edward Snowden at press conference "Operationally, we are not working with him and never have done, and are not asking him any questions about how his agency worked on Russia," said the Russian president. "I won't hide it, this person is not without interest for me. I think that thanks to Snowden, a lot changed in the minds of millions of people, including in the minds of major political leaders. "For me it was always intriguing how he decided this, because he's quite a young guy. What does he have? He doesn't have anything. How does he plan to live? Where does he plan to live?" He then said, half joking, that he was "jealous" that US authorities were able to carry out such invasive surveillance programmes, but added that people should remember that espionage is necessary for security reasons: "However much our American friends are criticised, I think their work was mainly directed at fighting terrorism. Of course, this has its negative aspects and on a political level the appetites of the special services need to be controlled. But overall, you have to understand that it is necessary." Putin also touched on the political crisis in Ukraine and Russia's $15bn loan to the nation. "If we really say it's a brotherly nation, then we should of course act like close relatives and help them in this difficult situation," he said. He denied that Russia had put pressure on Ukraine not to sign the EU deal: "It's not linked in any way to the Maidan [protests], or to the EU association. We just see that Ukraine is in a difficult position and we need to help it." Link to video: Vladimir Putin: Russia's bailout deal with Ukraine nothing to do with Kiev's EU relations Over the course of the press conference, Putin cracked a number of jokes, promised to solve numerous regions issues, and occasionally got angry, such as when he was asked about the appointment of a homophobic propagandist to run the country's biggest news agency. "State news agencies should be run by patriotic people who defend the interests of the Russian Federation," he said. It was only when journalists surrounded him on his way out and asked about Khodorkovsky that he dropped the biggest bombshell of the afternoon, despite not mentioning a pardon when asked about the jailed tycoon during the session itself.