2013: that was the year that was. Photograph: Alamy Age: Almost a year. Appearance: More disappearance. In a week or so. Big themes: Surveillance, gay marriage, horsemeat, tattoos, fracking, badgers, abdication. Who abdicated? Pope Benedict XVI, Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands, King Albert II of Belgium, Alex Ferguson. Other departures: Nelson Mandela, Margaret Thatcher, Hugo Chávez, Seamus Heaney, Lou Reed, Peter O'Toole, Ronnie Biggs, Matt Smith (as Doctor Who), Abu Qatada (deported to Jordan), Gareth Bale (sold to Real Madrid). Arrivals: Pope Francis I (narrowly pipping Fergie for the job), Justin Welby, Mark Carney, Mishal Husain, Peter Capaldi (as Doctor Who), the royal baby. Surprise returns: Jose Mourinho, David Bowie, Monty Python. Person of the year: Edward Snowden (hon mentions: Commander Chris Hadfield for stellar pop performance and crystal Methodist Paul Flowers for adding to the gaiety of the nation). Politician of the year: Robert Mugabe, re-elected as president of Zimbabwe for the 48th time. Sporting achievement of the year: Andy Murray winning the men's singles at Wimbledon. Sporting non-achievement of the year: Shared between Spurs and the England cricket team. Court case of the year: Chris Huhne/Vicky Pryce. Divorce of the year: Rupert Murdoch/Wendi Deng. Foot-in-mouth award: Justin Bieber, who, after visiting the Anne Frank museum in April, wrote in the visitors' book: "Truly inspiring to be able to come here. Anne was a great girl. Hopefully she would have been a belieber." Dinosaur of the year: The 72 million-year-old hadrosaur found in northern Mexico. Runnerup: Norman Tebbit, who, after the passage of the Marriage (Same Sex Couples) Bill in May, said: "When we have a Queen who is a lesbian and she marries another lady and then decides she would like to have a child and someone donates sperm and she gives birth to a child, is that child heir to the throne?" Word of the year: Selfie. Top "What is ...?" Google search of the year: "What is twerking?" What is twerking? Google it. Do say: "Thank God 2013 is almost over." Don't say: "Do you think 2014 will be any better?"