1. The files leaked by whistleblower Edward Snowden show that America’s National Security Agency (NSA) harvests large amounts of information from the internet, including web searches, live chats, file transfers, email contents, videos, photos and social networking exchanges. How many such items of information did it collect during just one month this year? 97bn 970m 9.7bn 97m 2. Britain’s GCHQ spy agency has a programme that uses mass-interception of fibre-optic cables to create what amounts to a vast internet buffer, storing message content for three days and metadata (the “digital envelopes” of emails and phone calls) for 30. What is this programme called? Prism Tracfin Tempora Sigint 3. The US came under sustained diplomatic fire when it emerged its intelligence agents were tracking the phone calls of foreign leaders thanks to senior officials in other department “sharing their Rolodexes”. Some of the most furious criticism come from presidents Dilma Rousseff of Brazil and Francois Hollande of France – as well as Germany’s Chancellor Angela Merkel, whose phone was allegedly tapped for 10 years. How many foreign leaders is the US known to have snooped on? 22 35 46 12 4. Opinions on Snowden are, naturally, divided. For some, he is “Hero of the Year.” For others, “He looks like a grandstander.” Who, respectively, used just those words about the NSA whistleblower? Jemima Khan, Ann Coulter Julian Assange, Rush Limbaugh Michael Moore, Donald Trump Al Gore, Sarah Palin 5. Klondyke, Wabash, Perdido, Blackfoot and Powell are codenames for broadly similar US surveillance operations. To what, exactly, do they refer? Programmes to intercept email traffic, including on Google, Yahoo and Outlook Databases storing information culled from major credit card transactions Operations to bug foreign embassies and missions in Washington and New York Discrete analytic programmes developed by the NSA to monitor information harvested from social networks 6. The Guardian’s editor, Alan Rusbridger, appeared before the home affairs select committee earlier this month to discuss the paper’s role in the revelations. Which of the following was he NOT accused of? Exposing the sexual orientation of GCHQ employees Breaching the Federal Express terms and conditions of carriage Deliberately enhancing the reputation of the Northampton MP Michael Ellis Revealing that surveillance operatives had been on a works outing to Disneyland 7. The NSA runs a top-secret $20m-a-year surveillance programme that gives the agency access to information on its targets from the servers of some of the USA’s biggest technology companies including Google, Apple, Microsoft, Facebook, AOL and Yahoo. What is it called? Fairview Stormbrew Prism Dropmire 8. The former Conservative MP Louise Mensch has been very active on Twitter during the Snowden affair. Which of the following tweets was NOT posted by her? For all those saying “Snowden’s got more copies” well of course - like the ones he gave China and Russia and Wikileaks. #traitor I knew it, I knew it. James Ball flew the docs to New York (right James?) and they hadn’t even been read. Jesus #Rusbridger I want to take a moment to thank our Border Police and Security at Heathrow airport for keeping us safe and retrieving stolen intel data. Glenn Greenwald … must win a Pulitzer prize, there can be no doubt about that. Snowden comes across as a genuine patriot. 9. The furore over whether the Guardian and other newspapers were right to publish the documents leaked by Snowden has to some extent distracted attention from the fact of how easy it was to obtain the information in the first place. A great many people like Snowden, not directly employed by national governments, had access to the material. How many, exactly? 20,000 850,000 300,000 700,000 10. “As loth as I am to give any credit to what’s happening here, I think it’s clear that some of the conversations this has generated, some of the debate, actually needed to happen.” Who said this of the not insubstantial fallout from the Snowden affair? Theresa May, British home secretary James Clapper, director of US national intelligence Sir Andrew Parker, head of MI5 Eric Holder, US attorney general 11. Leading internet companies including Microsoft, Apple, Google, Yahoo, Twitter and Facebook have demanded sweeping changes to US government surveillance laws, saying the bulk collection of data should be barred so as to help preserve the public’s “trust in the internet”. How much are these companies worth – and how much have experts estimated they stand to lose as a result of Snowden’s leaks? $1.4trn and $35bn $950bn and $8bn $2.1trn and $100bn $450bn and $6bn 12. The editors of 30 major world news publications including the New York Times, Le Monde, El Pais and Der Spiegel have publicly expressed their backing for the Guardian’s decision to publish extracts from the Snowden documents. How many British daily newspaper editors have done so? None Two Five Seven