The Queen used her Christmas broadcast to speak about her great-grandson and future king, Prince George, describing how a new baby brings "happiness and hope". In her traditional yuletide message to the nation and Commonwealth, she said: "Here at home my own family is a little larger this Christmas. "As so many of you will know, the arrival of a baby gives everyone the chance to contemplate the future with renewed happiness and hope. For the new parents, life will never be quite the same again." Her words were accompanied by footage of her grandson, the Duke of Cambridge, bouncing his son, the third in line to the throne, up and down in his arms, with the duchess by his side, while chatting to other family members outside the Chapel Royal, St James's Palace, at the infant prince's christening in October. Channel 4's alternative Christmas message was delivered by the NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden, who said the dangers to personal privacy that George Orwell warned about in his book 1984 were nothing compared to what we were facing today. As the messages were broadcast, the largest number of royals for several years was gathered at Sandringham, on the Queen's Norfolk estate, where baby George was undoubtedly the centre of attention. Earlier, around 3,000 wellwishers turned out on a crisp bright morning to see members of the family walking from Sandringham House to St Mary Magdalene church where they attended the Christmas Day service. Prince William and Kate at Sandringham. Photograph: Joe Giddens/PA Many of the visitors had arrived with hopes of catching a glimpse of the newest addition to the family, but were to be disappointed. George remained inside and out of sight in the warm while his parents, looking relaxed, walked hand-in-hand, smiling and waving to the crowd. Last year they had spent Christmas with the duchess's family in Bucklebury, Berkshire. Cicely Howard, 75, from Great Yarmouth, who asked the duchess about the baby, said: "She told me he was having a lovely day but was more interested in the wrapping paper than the presents." William told the crowd: "We've had a good morning with George and I can't wait until next year when he's bigger." Also making an appearance this year was a hirsute Prince Harry – still sporting the beard he grew on his recent Antarctic trek to the South Pole with the charity Walking with the Wounded. The beard, it appeared, was here to stay for a while at least, as he told wellwishers it was a "royal tradition". Last Christmas the prince was in Afghanistan. While Harry was instantly recognisable, the Earl of Wessex was less sure of his standing, joking with the crowd: "I bet none of you know who I am." Despite his non-appearance, five-month-old George did feature prominently in the Queen's broadcast as behind-the-scenes footage was shown of senior royals posing at Clarence House for a historic photograph after his christening. Featuring senior royals, it was taken by the celebrity portrait photographer Jason Bell. In the footage, a voice thought to be Bell's could be heard saying: "One, two, three," as a group picture was taken of George, his parents, the Queen and Prince Philip, Prince Charles, the Duchess of Cornwall and Prince Harry. "As with all who are christened, George was baptised into a joyful faith of Christian duty and service," said the Queen, who, as supreme governor of the Church of England traditionally imbues her annual message with a religious theme. The Queen delivers her Christmas message. Photograph: Getty Images "After the christening, we gathered for the traditional photograph. It was a happy occasion, bringing together four generations." The main theme of the seasonal message was reflection as the Queen looked back on prominent events over the past year, which also included the 60th anniversary of her 1953 coronation at Westminster Abbey. "I myself had cause to reflect this year, at Westminster Abbey, on my own pledge of service made in that great church on Coronation Day 60 years earlier," the Queen said. "The anniversary reminded me of the remarkable changes that have occurred since the coronation, many of them for the better, and of the things that have remained constant, such as the importance of family, friendship and good neighbourliness." One significant recent change was the Queen's absence from the biennial Commonwealth heads of government meeting (Chogm), at which she was represented in Sri Lanka by Charles for the first time. The heir to the throne opened the summit after a decision by the Queen, who is 87, to cut back on long-haul flights. On the subject of the Commonwealth, the Queen looked forward to the Commonwealth Games, to be staged in Glasgow next year. "The baton relay left London in October and is now on the other side of the world, on its way across 70 nations and territories before arriving in Scotland next summer," she said, as images were shown of the Olympic gold medallist Sir Chris Hoy holding the baton. "Its journey is a reminder that the Commonwealth can offer us a fresh view of life. "My son Charles summed this up at the recent meeting in Sri Lanka. He spoke of the Commonwealth's 'family ties' that are a source of encouragement." Prince Harry, with the beard he grew for a trip to Antarctica, and William. Photograph: Tim Rooke/Rex There was no mention of the controversy over the staging of Chogm in Sri Lanka, a country whose human rights record is the subject of continuing scrutiny. But, perhaps in acknowledgement of tensions past and present within the Commonwealth, she said: "Like any family, there can be differences of opinion. But however strongly they are expressed, they are held within the common bond of friendship and shared experiences." Recorded earlier this month, in the blue drawing room at Buckingham Palace, the Queen, who writes her annual message herself, began by speaking of a man she once knew who gained a clearer insight into the world after spending a year in a plaster cast recovering from a back operation. "He read a lot, and thought a lot, and felt miserable. Later, he realised this time of forced retreat from the world had helped him to understand the world more clearly. "We all need to get the balance right between action and reflection. With so many distractions, it is easy to forget to pause and take stock," she said. Seated, with a large Christmas tree behind her, the Queen wore a diamond, ruby and sapphire brooch, a present from her parents to celebrate the birth of Prince Charles in 1948, which she wore at George's christening. On view were family photographs, including a family group at the christening, flanked by black-and-white portraits of her father, George VI, and mother, Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother. Her thoughts, she said, were with those who were not with their families this Christmas, including service personnel on operations abroad and emergency service workers. "We are forever grateful to all those who put themselves at risk to keep us safe," she said.