In our series of everything that 2013 will be remembered for, we reach Moocs, the nest Nexus devices to date and one Edward Snowden. Moocs Arguably the most significant industry to be disrupted yet, many of the first world's most prestigious educational institutions are being prised open in the form of Moocs, or massively open online courses. Anyone can join in, provided they have an internet connection. • Educators must assure that online courses meet the same academic standards Motorola Moto G One of the best budget smartphones ever made, the Motorola Moto G costs £135, proving that affordable phones can still be fast, feel premium and easy to use.  • Review: Lives up to game-changing hype at bargain price Moves This app showed that activity tracking isn't just for fitness obsessives. Founded by Habbo Hotel creator Sampo Karjalainen, Moves took off quickly this year with the ambition to become the mainstream activity tracker of choice. • 'Moves isn't about paying $200 for a device and remembering to charge, carry and sync it' Nest Protect Tony Fadell, founder and chief executive of Nest Labs Photograph: Official LeWeb Photos/flickr How many other sectors are going to be disrupted by innovative technology? Tony Fadell, formerly known as 'the father of the iPod' for his work at Apple, decided that smoke alarms could and should be much better, and so launched the Nest Protect. The £110 alarm is intelligent enough to distinguish burnt toast from a real domestic threat, speaks rather than bleeps and will also switch on its nightlight if it detects you walking underneath in the dark. • The days of flicking tea towels at overzealous smoke alarms are numbered Netflix Netflix arguably broke through the barrier of being that company you might have heard of to being the name behind some of the best TV of 2013.  • Dramas escaped the box this year, thanks to Netflix Nexus 5 The best Android smartphone available at the moment, the Google Nexus 5 is fast, slick and a well put together 5in smartphone – Android the way Google intended it to be. Its £300 or less price belays its premium experience.  • Review: the best Android smartphone going Nexus 7 A Google-controlled, Asus-built tablet, the Nexus 7 was arguably the best received Google tablet yet. A premium experience with a beautifully crisp high-definition screen, fast processor and the latest Android operating system, it cost less than £200.  • Review: Slick and usable, price may be the biggest selling point for the Nexus 7 Nick D'Aloisio The Wimbledon teenager sold his fledgling news app to Yahoo for an estimated £18m. He bought a new computer, some new trainers and put the rest in a trust fund - while Yahoo got a trophy talent acquisition and yet another piece of good news. • 'Marissa Mayer wants to reinvent the company for mobile - I can't wait to work on that' Nintendo failing 2013 was a bad year for the once great Japanese games firm. September saw the death of the hugely influential former president Hiroshi Yamauchi, but it was the launch of its cheaper 2DS console that worried fans. "Why release a 3DS without 3D?" asked one diehard fan.  • Is the 2DS an admission of failure? NSA files Edward Snowden presents Channel 4's alternative Christmas message, 2013 Photograph: HO/EPA It was the story of the year - if not the decade, redefining the relationship between the consumer and citizen with big business and government. It was June when the Guardian published the first in a series of stories based on information leaked by former US government contractor Edward Snowden, who copied 58,000 documents detailing the scale of global surveillance by the US and UK security services. After revealing extensive monitoring and of mobile and web data, data interception, surveillance of foreign heads of state including German chancellor Angela Merkel and triggering a debate between Silicon Valley's top executives and President Obama, Snowden capped the year by delivering Channel 4's alternative Christmas message. "A child born today will have no conception of privacy at all," he said. "They'll never know what it means to have a private moment to themselves an unrecorded, unanalysed thought. And that's a problem because privacy matters; privacy is what allows us to determine who we are and who we want to be. "All I wanted was for the public to be able to have a say in how they are governed." • The NSA and surveillance - made simple Oculus Rift Visitors use Oculus Rift virtual reality headsets at the IFA Electronics Trade Fair in Berlin. Photograph: REX/Zhang fan The augmented reality gaming mask which was partly funded through Kickstarter showed a 1080p version at E3 this year. The consumer version should become available in late 2014. • Playwright Lucy Prebble on why Oculus Rift rocked her gaming world OK Google Expanding on the always-listening voice search ignited by Google Glass, “OK Google” brought the same voice command to the desktop, laptop and smartphone, unifying what will become a central way of accessing Google across desktop, mobile and wearables. • Android 4.4 Kitkat adds always-listening search Old Economy Steve The favourite meme of disgruntled generation Y, who vented their rage at the baby boomers who ruined the economy for them. • Whatever George Osbourne says, graduates are being forced to take low-skilled roles Operation Steubenville After a 16-year old girl was repeatedly raped by two high school football players in Ohio, several hackers helped bring attention to the scandal, gathering evidence the attackers had broadcast on social media channels that the police had failed to track down.  • Is the more grievous sin revealing the flaws of the authorities? Papers, Please Darker and more subversive than the attention-grabbing Grand Theft Auto V, Lucas Pope's Papers, Please is an essay in exploring the politics and bureaucracy of immigration through the character of a border control officer. • Genuine transgression occurs at the fringes of art Parrot AR Drone The 2.0 incarnation of Parrot's app-controlled added auto-stabilisation, tricks and boosted the capabilities of the Wi-Fi-controlled drone to make it one of the best toys around. Controlled by smartphone or tablet, it’s easy to use, fun to fly and can spy on your neighbours from 15m up with ease. • Drones and chilli powder help save Kenya's elephants Next instalment on Monday