Top eight stories on MediaGuardian David Cameron warns press: sign up or else PM says UK press risks 'hideous statutory regulation' in future if it declines to seek recognition under terms of new royal charter BBC Trust's Patten 'busted flush' says Greg Dyke Dyke says Patten has been damaged by controversies over Jimmy Savile and large payouts to former executives Christmas TV battle won by Mrs Brown's Boys Sitcom featuring Brendan O'Carroll as eponymous character is surprise winner, while EastEnders suffers big ratings slump 2013: the media year in pictures Gallery (18 pictures) We look back at some of the biggest stories and most striking images of the past year Addison Cresswell – the best I ever dealt with Peter Fincham: 'He was one of the key figures responsible for turning comedy into the industry it is today' Monkey's Christmas gifts – what media folk (should) hope is under the tree BBC hacks looking for jobs in print; John Witherow's ideal DVD; and Mail Online chief's MacArthur conquest Bake Off finalist told to 'know her place' Contestant in BBC cookery competition Kimberley Wilson says viewers told her she 'wasn't showing enough vulnerability' Radio Times: 90 years of Xmas covers See classic festive front pages from the TV and radio listings magazine's nine decades Top comment on MediaGuardian Merging BBC2 and BBC4 would be a terrible mistake Kirsty Lang: From Borgen to The Fall, we're living through a golden age of television. David Dimbleby's proposal would leave no room for all these riches Today's headlines The Guardian Former BBC director general Greg Dyke says trust chairman Chris Patten is a 'busted flush'. P1, P6 David Cameron warns press to sign up to charter or risk 'hideous' legislation. P2 Sir Tim Berners-Lee forces BBC to bend its 'no atheists' rule. P16 Comic Relief to sell holdings in tobacco, arms and alcohol. P20 Mrs Brown's Boys surprise winner of the Christmas Day TV ratings battle. P24 Is it time for Top of the Pops to return? G2 P12 Daily Telegraph BBC banned Sir Tim Berners-Lee from having an atheist deliver Thought for the Day. P10 BBC wins rating war. P11 David Cameron warns press will regret rejecting charter. P17 Financial Times Edward Snowden saga heralds a radical shift in capitalism. P11 Former Sky executives come back to haunt old employer. P19 The Times PM urges newspapers to seek official recognition for their new press regulator or risk state regulator. P14 Christmas Day TV ratings. P25 Vogue editor bins messy Christmas tree. P25 The Independent David Cameron warns press to sign up to royal charter. P9 Mrs Brown's Boys tops Christmas TV ratings. P18 BBC denies atheist traditional slot on Thought for the Day. P21 i Atheist delivers the first Thought for the Day on Radio 4. P5 Kelner's view: Is old age becoming sexy at last? TV dramatists think so. P17 Comic Relief rethinks investments. P19 Wall Street Journal Europe China opens up mobile-services sector. P17 Daily Mail David Cameron threatens press over tougher regulation. P10 Mary Berry to launch cookware range. P11 Comic Relief to drop arms and tobacco investments. P17 Hobbies fall out of fashion as we prefer to watch television. P19 Viewers switch off 'snoozy' Downton Abbey Christmas episode. P25 US Vogue editor throws out messy Christmas tree. P35 Daily Express Doctor Who has the most watched Christmas Day television moment. P9 David Attenborough keeps up frantic schedule despite heart surgery. P17 PM warns newspapers that defying new watchdog plans could lead to state control. P23 The Sun Babies named after Towie catchphrase. P3 Abbey Clancy upstaged by husband's dancing at Strictly party. P3 New Doctor Who helps BBC top Christmas ratings. P15 Emmerdale bosses apologise to transgender woman over joke. TV Biz P1 Bands Damage, Eternal, 3T and A1 to re-form for The Big Reunion. TV Biz P1 Interview with Benidorm actor Jake Canuso. TV Biz P2, 3 Daily Mirror PM warns newspapers they may risk state regulation if they don't agree to new watchdog. P2 Mrs Brown's Boys festive ratings winner. P9 Dannii Minogue could be back on the X Factor next year. P9 David Bowie does an Elvis impression on BBC Radio 6 show. P19 Supergroup to be put together for The Big Reunion. P21 New baby names influenced by Towie. P33 Daily Star Kylie Minogue is too small for her chair on The Voice. P3 ITV bosses put together ex-stars supergroup for The Big Reunion. P3 BBC comedy Mrs Brown's Boys claims festive ratings crown. P11 Towie catchphrase among a host of weird names given to babies. P25 Go to MediaGuardian