Plays don't come much bigger or more ambitious than Lucy Kirkwood's Chimerica: the kind of epic political piece we're always told is now out of fashion. Although Kirkwood's play deals primarily with the complex relationship between China and America, it seems strikingly relevant to our own concerns. I can't help wondering if David Cameron, who led a big trade mission to China recently, took on board the point made by a British market researcher in the play: that the best way to gain a foothold in Chinese business life is to understand it's a country that values the supremacy of its own culture. What made Kirkwood's play so good was that it combined an exciting story with big ideas. You genuinely wanted to know what was going to happen next to Joe, the fictional American snapper trying to track down the lone protestor confronting a tank in Tiananmen Square in 1989. For Kirkwood, this became a way of exploring a host of other issues: the tension between the world's two biggest economies; the way China punishes protest while America fiftfully rewards it (though don't tell that to Bradley Manning or Edward Snowden); and the way investigative journalism is becoming cripplingly expensive while still requiring a mix of high ideals and rat-like cunning. We're used, in plays and films, to the idea of the journalist-as-villain. Kirkwood gave us something much more interesting: the journalist as both dogged seeker-after-truth and sad schmuck in his personal relationships. Having written about magazines in her last play, NSFW, Kirkwood also showed a real understanding of daily papers. Even if I couldn't possibly endorse it, I also chuckled at one point made by Joe's dyed-in-the-wool editor: "You think I enjoy using the word 'multi-platform'? That I think it's desirable to employ the best writers in the country, then stick a comments section under their articles so whatever no-neck grain-fucker from Arkansas can chip in his five uninformed, misspelled, hateful five cents because God forbid an opinion should go unvoiced?" I'd happily admit, as I'm sure would Kirkwood, that her play owed a lot to Lyndsey Turner's propulsive direction and Es Devlin's photographic design. But this was a play rich in content, resonant in theme and guaranteed, I bet, to have a long life on the American non-profit circuit. Whether it will ever get to Beijing I somehow doubt.