With 2014 almost upon us, I wanted take a quick look back at the year that was – and dole out a few awards for some of the most important stories and people of 2013. 1. The Tom Friedman "Person Of The Year" Award: Edward Snowden A couple of years ago the New York Times columnist Thomas Friedman wrote a book highlighting "super-empowered individuals" who were "able to act much more directly and much more powerfully on the world stage". Edward Snowden may not have been the person that Friedman had in mind, but when it comes to individuals single-handedly transforming global affairs it's hard to imagine anyone coming close this year (or any other year). Whether you love Snowden or hate him; whether you think he's a traitor or a hero; whether you believe he's a narcissist or a patriot, his decision to abscond with and leak tens of thousands (maybe millions) of highly classified documents from the National Security Agency has significantly embarrassed the United States, deeply affected the country's diplomatic relations and even more important changed the relationship between the NSA and the tech industry, perhaps irrevocably. It has also fundamentally changed our knowledge of NSA domestic and foreign intelligence gathering and spearheaded what will likely be major reforms of the NSA and its intelligence-gathering mandate. While it may take a while before we fully understand and appreciate the ramifications of these leaks, no offense to Pope Francis, but if Edward Snowden isn't the person of the year, then the designation has no meaning. 2. The Rodney Dangerfield Runner-up Award: John Kerry When John Kerry was nominated to be Secretary of State earlier this year, it was viewed by many as the awarding of the proverbial second-prize in the Foggy Bottom beauty contest. Susan Rice was President Obama's preference for America's key diplomat – but she'd been "Benghazi'd". No one is saying that anymore – or at least no one should be. Kerry's accomplishments are amazing: successful completion of an interim agreement with Iran to curb its nuclear ambitions; a game-saving diplomatic breakthrough with Russia to eliminate Syria's chemical weapons arsenal and the achievement of an agreement with the Afghan government over the long-term presence of US troops there(ish). Yet, none of these are even his greatest achievement. That would be getting Israelis and Palestinians back to the negotiating table – and to do so in such a way as to put maximum pressure on all sides (but particularly Israel) to reach a deal. If (and I believe when) an agreement is reached next year, Kerry will likely go down as one of the best Secretaries of State the US has ever seen. 3. The Misunderestimated Person of the Year Award: Barack Obama The media narrative on Barack Obama's year is fairly clear-cut: it stank. Politico even went so far as to wonder if Obama had one of the worst fifth years of any American president. If, as political journalists are wont to do, one judges Obama's 2013 on the basis of his poll numbers or number of "scandals" then yes, it wasn't a great year. If one judges Obama's record on policy grounds (as political journalists are wont to not do), 2013 was surprisingly successful. On foreign policy, he (along with John Kerry) got Israelis and the Palestinians to the negotiating table; his tireless five-year effort to halt Iran's nuclear ambitions without using military force began to come to fruition; he continued the US disengagement from the Afghanistan war and offered the first tepid steps toward de-emphasizing the war on terrorism. On Syria, he stumbled his way into a military engagement he didn't want and then in the 11th hour snatched victory from the jaws of defeat by both getting Syrian strong Bashir Assad to give up its chemical weapons and avoiding deeper US involvement in the war. These efforts are critical steps in disengaging the US from the Middle East and putting in place a more restrained and modest foreign policy. On domestic policy, the record is less impressive, mainly because Congress and the modern Republican Party exists. Still Obama stared down the GOP on the fiscal cliff and the government shutdown without giving up much in return (and getting Republicans to finally agree to a tax increase). For all the sturm and drang over the problems with healthcare.gov, Obama blocked any GOP effort to substantially change his signature health care law. A few days from now, it will fully go into effect, transforming the lives of millions of Americans for the better. While he failed to unwind sequestration, get gun control legislation passed or enact immigration reform (yet), the effort by Harry Reid to finally put an end to GOP obstruction of his appointees could create Obama's most enduring policy legacy – a remaking of the federal court system and a host of new regulations that will further key progressive policy goals. Throw into the mix new environmental regulations and big wins in the Supreme Court on gay rights and for a guy who had a lousy year, Barack Obama had a pretty good 2013. 4. The Tom Bissell Award for Historical Correction: Gary Bass's The Blood Telegram These successes, notwithstanding, a strange little micro-meme emerged in 2013: Barack Obama was somehow worse than or even comparable to Richard Nixon. The reasons were multi-varied: he subpoenaed reporters phone records; he delayed implementation of Obamacare; and his IRS conducted investigations of its political enemies. Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell even ran an ad comparing the two presidents. Now I understand that political rhetoric can sometimes get a bit inflated… but how soon we forget inconvenient facts like this one: Richard Nixon plotted a criminal conspiracy from the Oval Office. Thankfully, Princeton University professor Gary Bass has provided us with a helpful reminder of Nixon's true character. In The Blood Telegram, Bass expertly recounts the stunning indifference of Nixon and his Secretary of State Henry Kissinger to the reports from US diplomats of Pakistani genocide in what was then East Pakistan (now Bangladesh), including the death of 300,000 Bengalis and the flight of tens of millions more refugees. Nixon and Kissinger were reliant on support from the Pakistani government for the secret back-channel talks with the Chinese government that would lead to Nixon's historic trip there in 1972. Thus they were reluctant to cross Islamabad or even stop arms shipments to the country. Plus both men hated India and, in particular, its leader Indira Gandhi, a fact revealed in vivid often disquieting detail from Oval Office tapes unearthed by Bass. At a time when Americans seem to have forgotten Nixon's true legacy (this year's 40th anniversary of the Saturday Night Massacre went completely unmentioned in the popular press) Bass has performed an essential function: reminding us that not only was Richard Nixon a bad president, he was a bad person. In short, for all of Barack Obama's faults comparing him to Richard Nixon isn't so much an insult to the president – it's an insult to history. 5. The King Canute Moment of 2013 Award: Utah's gay marriage ban is ruled unconstitutional Utah is by all accounts the most conservative state in America, which is what makes the image of gay Utahans getting married there this past week (after a federal judge ruled that Utah's same-sex marriage statute is unconstitutional) the most stunning moment in a year full of stunning progress on gay rights. What's speeding this process is both a combination of judicial intervention (the supreme court rulings on Doma and Prop 8 in California) and also shifting popular norms. In 2012, there were four gay marriage initiatives on the ballot. All became law. This year we're now up to 18 states that have legalized gay marriage. Even casual homophobia is no longer considered acceptable. It was striking that in the recent imbroglio over Duck Dynasty's Phil Robertson's controversial statements in GQ Magazine, more attention was paid to his anti-gay comments than his even more toxic paternalistic racism toward African-Americans. When it comes to gay rights, the transformation in public attitudes is nothing less than extraordinary. Welcome to the new normal in America. 6. The Dinesh D'Souza More Things Change The More They Stay The Same Award: Chief Justice John Roberts 2013 was the year that the supreme court decided that racism in America is dead. Ok, I'm exaggerating but only slightly. In a landmark ruling, penned by Chief Justice John Roberts, the court ruled that states with legacies of racial discrimination no longer needed to get "preclearance" from the Department of Justice before changing their voting rights laws. As Roberts wrote, "The conditions that originally justified these measures no longer characterize voting in the covered jurisdictions." It took about 48 hours for Roberts to be proven wrong. Six states that previously were required to get preclearance announced plans to place new restrictions on voting rights. If there was any question as to why these laws are being enacted, a study by two University of Massachusetts researchers ended the issue. After examining restrictive voting laws proposed between 2006 and 2011, they found that "the more that minorities and lower-income individuals in a state voted, the more likely such restrictions were to be proposed". Of course, this was already obvious to all but the most "colorblind" observers. Roberts decision was a reminder that for all the civil rights progress that's been made over the past several years, racism against African-Americans still remains America's original – and enduring – sin. 7. The "Major TJ 'King' Kong" Under The Radar Award: (tie) abortion restrictions, Medicaid expansion, cuts to food stamps and sequestration In a year in which there was renewed national attention to civil liberties and, in particular, privacy the continued assault on abortion rights oddly seemed to fly under the radar screen. And yet on the state level, it was a terrible year for women's rights. State after state put new and onerous restrictions on a woman's legal right to have an abortion. The new abortion law that garnered the most attention was in Texas (due in large measure to Wendy Davis's unsuccessful filibuster of the bill), but in North Carolina, a state that a few years ago appeared to be trending blue, Governor Pat McCrory signed a measure that would have the practical effect of closing down most of the state's abortion clinics. In North Dakota, legislators tried to ban abortions after a fetal heartbeat is detected (or about 5-6 weeks of pregnancy). In Ohio, a new anti-abortion law follows the pattern of most of these new initiatives: making it more and more difficult for women to get abortions – with even greater impediments for poor women. These laws were almost uniformly pushed by Republican legislators, a group that in 2013 demonstrated its abiding devotion to protecting fetuses and its utter lack of interest in actual living children. Whether it was trying to cut food stamps for poor families; the on-going refusal by 23 states (all with Republican governors or GOP controlled state legislation) to expand Medicaid coverage to their citizens, which is, according to the White House, leaving more than 5 million Americans without health insurance, or the refusal to unwind sequestration, which disproportionately hurts those Americans dependent on government programs, like special education funding, Head Start and public housing; Republican heartlessness to the most vulnerable among us reached new heights of ugliness in 2013. 8. The Gavrilo Princip Award for Pointless Political Spectacle: Ted Cruz For the non-history buffs out there, Gavrilo Princip was the Serbian nationalist who killed Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria in June 1914 and thus sparked the first world war. Princip was intending to strike a blow for Serbian independence. Things didn't work out well. While the efforts of Ted Cruz and his merry band of GOP extremists to stop Obamacare this past fall by shutting down the government were not nearly as deadly as the actions of young Princip, they were similarly as pointless. They failed to stop Americans from signing up for health insurance and they gave the GOP a needlessly self-inflicted wound that further perpetuated the image of the party as both out-of-touch and increasingly unbalanced. On the other hand, the continued strength of the Tea Party (as also reflected in the numerous primary challenges by Tea Party members against "establishment" Senate Republicans) and the raised profile of Cruz gave the Texas senator a huge boost in his goal of becoming the GOP presidential nominee in 2016. I suppose that was the idea all along. 9. The Brian Bosworth Award For Most Over-Hyped Story: Obamacare's website woes Back when I was a blogger, I had a semi-regular feature called "That Wacky, Wacky Krauthammer" – named for the Washington Post columnist and conservative commentator Charles Krauthammer who is particularly prone to wacky statements. It was a feature I should have brought back to commemorate what was easily the most overheated statement about the problems with healthcare.gov. "We have not just Obamacare unraveling, not just the Obama administration unraveling, not just the Democratic majority of the Senate [unraveling], but we could be looking at the collapse of American liberalism," said Krauthammer. Here's my counter-prediction: Obamacare will not unravel; liberalism will somehow avoid collapse, and a year or so from now Obamacare's initial hiccups will be long forgotten as just another overhyped story that tells us little about the trajectory of the most important piece of social policy enacted in more than four decades. Indeed, there is little evidence that the website's problems had much impact on Obama's poll numbers. 10. The Russell Casse Selfless Moment of the Year Award: Evie Hudack Evie Hudack is a Democratic state senator from Colorado who was facing a National Rifle Association (NRA)-backed recall election because of her support for the state's tough new gun control law. Actually let me correct that: she was a State Senator from Colorado. At the end of November, she resigned her seat to prevent a recall election and, in effect, ensure that Democrats would maintain their majority in the Senate and thus prevent those new gun control laws from being overturned. While Hudack was likely to lose in the recall fight (just as two other Colorado Democrats did earlier this year) her decision was both an inspiring example of a politician putting her beliefs ahead of her ambition and also a depressing reminder of the extraordinary power that the NRA continues to wield in national politics. A year since the horrific massacre at Sandy Hook more than 34,000 Americans are estimated to have died at the hands of a gun. Aside from Ms Hudack and a handful of others there were few examples of the sort of political courage necessary to end America's scourge of gun violence. Meanwhile the bloodletting continues. On Christmas Eve, a two-month old was shot and killed in Lancaster, Pennsylvania. Bonus: The Scarlett Rhea Cohen Award for Global Development: the world On a more hopeful note, I had another daughter this year. Her name is Scarlett Rhea Cohen and she is adorable – and thankfully a pretty good sleeper so far. Scarlett is a particularly lucky child. In fact, she's a lot luckier than her old man. When I was born, the US was fighting a terrible war in Southeast Asia; there were more "not free" countries then there were "free countries", and the world was defined by superpower conflict and the nagging threat of nuclear holocaust. Scarlett was born into a very different place. Today the world has never been safer, war has never been more rare (there were no new inter-state wars in 2013) and developing countries are experiencing transformational levels of improvement in health, education and income. In short, for all the many problems around us – all of which require urgent attention – we have within our hands the tools, the ideas and the lessons to make the world an even better place than it is today.