A worker inspects a factory in Dhaka after a fire killed eight people in May 2013. Supply chain improvement will be a key area for sustainabilty in 2014. Photograph: Andrew Biraj/REUTERS The turning of the calendar, as always, provides an opportunity to step back from the day to day, and take stock of how much progress is being made on the journey to a truly sustainable economy. Before looking ahead, it is useful to see how 2013 played out. The year that is closing delivered, as always, several unexpected developments. One year ago, no one knew of Edward Snowden, for example. And no one foresaw the worst accident in the history of the garment industry, which we all witnessed with horror at Rana Plaza in April. But looking back, it is striking to see how many of the predictions made 12 months ago developed as expected. As predicted, the internet of things continued to grow apace. In addition to smart buildings, there is more and more buzz about how self-driving cars may not be that far off. Our energy system continues to evolve in different directions at once. The use of coal in the US continued its decline, though its grip on the European energy system, as well as that of China and India, tightened. Renewables are advancing, with the majority of additional energy in the US coming from renewables, not least solar. All in all, however, as the IPCC's soon to be published report will show, we continue to move in the wrong direction overall on climate. This all plays out in the context of the overall economy. Ongoing sluggishness has eroded most political ambition in the west to address climate and other challenges: witness the u-turns in Australia, Japan, and the UK away from prior commitments to reduce carbon intensity. As we look ahead to the new year, it makes more sense to consider not only 2014, but also the road ahead to 2015. Much of what will happen in the world of sustainability in 2014 is in fact setting the stage for potential international agreements in 2015, on climate at COP-21 in Paris and the expected agreement on Sustainable Development Goals to replace the Millennium Development Goals. After a decidedly mixed year in 2013, there is reason for hope as we look ahead, if three key dependencies turn the right direction. The path to significant progress on multiple fronts – on climate, supply chains, and integrated reporting – is clear. On climate, neither the public nor government now appears poised to shift away from business as usual. And while many businesses continue to look for improvements and efficiencies, we have not – yet – seen the kinds of coalition building that developed in advance of Copenhagen. With government and the public largely timid in their approach, business can and should encourage greater ambition on the road to Paris. Business not only innovates products and business models, it has a voice, which has untapped potential to unlock greater ambition in other sectors. The tragedy at Rana Plaza in Bangladesh last spring underscored ongoing challenges in ensuring that global supply chains deliver safety as well as economic benefit. Western buyers responded to the massive loss of life with political will and financial resources, expressed through two new initiatives, the Alliance and the Accord. It is essential that the two initiatives build on recent efforts to collaborate and coordinate. In Bangladesh, the question is whether the business establishment and government are ready to put aside two decades of inaction, and a tradition of corruption, to change the way the industry operates. But global progress depends on consumers acting more consistently than merely expressing outrage at the latest accident. Finally, integrated reporting appears ready to make a big step forward. This is no mere technical matter; integrated reporting holds the potential for reframing the very question of how companies define and work towards success. The good news is that the IR framework is now in the public sphere, with a growing number of companies using and testing the model. The crucial question is whether investors, who have been slow to embrace the model, will show enough interest to see demand for this kind of reporting take off. 2013 shows us that systemic change remains elusive. The story of the next two years is all about whether we can transcend incremental change. Unlocking the potential in business voice, consumer action and investors' portfolios will determine the outcome. Aron Cramer is the president and CEO of BSR Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox