Were your new Christmas presents too diverting to read the news? Was your TV screen commandeered for family films? If you're just emerging from your Christmas cocoon, here's a guide to all the news stories you might have missed while you were trying to come up with recipes for leftover Stilton. In the UK Stormy seas lash Seaham Harbour, County Durham Photograph: Owen Humphreys/PA • As you may have noticed, there was a lot of weather. First, storms left five people dead and caused travel chaos. Then, across the south of the country. After a couple of days' respite, the rains returned, causing further chaos and prompting a meeting of the Cobra emergencies committee. But the Met Office warns the UK's worst winter storm for two decades is set to continue. • Records released by the National Archives reveal Thatcher's secret plan to use the army at the height of the 1984 miner's strike. Fearing the country would grind to a halt, she prepared to declare a national state of emergency and use troops to transport coal. • David Cameron backed proposals for 100-year prison sentences for those convicted of murder and other serious offences in the UK. • Labour accuses Michael Gove of "sowing political division" after his comments that some leftwing narratives of the first world war are unpatriotic. • The Northern Irish peace process talks brokered by Richard Haass collapsed without reaching an agreement • As EU labour restrictions on workers from Romania and Bulgaria were lifted, the rightwing press's predictions of a stampede of eastern Europeans coming to claim benefits failed to materialise. • Labour's former Europe minister Denis MacShane was sentenced to six months in prison for making bogus expense claims • Ukip leader Nigel Farage shocked many within his own party by calling for the UK to welcome Syrian refugees Across Europe Forensic teams comb the remains of the bombed Volgograd trolleybus. Photograph: Maxim Shipenkov/EPA • In Volgograd, in southern Russia, many people were killed by two bombs set off on consecutive days, one in a train station and the other on a trolleybus • Seven-time Formula One world champion Michael Schumacher sustained a head injury while skiing in Méribel. After undergoing two operations, he is still in a critical but stable state • In his latest attempt to appear magnanimous after releasing Mikhail Khodorkovsky, Russian president Vladimir Putin released both of the members of Pussy Riot who were still imprisoned and let members of the Arctic 30 return home Further afield Edward Snowden delivers the Channel 4 alternative Christmas speech Photograph: Channel 4 • Days after NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden announced that his mission had been accomplished and delivered Channel 4's alternative Christmas message, a US federal judge declared that the agency's mass collection of phone data does not violate the constitution. Two days after that, German magazine Der Spiegel reported on a top-secret hacking unit that inserts backdoor spying devices into computer systems. Apple has insisted it did not work with the NSA to create a way to hack into iPhones. • After South Sudan fell into a civil war which displaced over 120,000 people, African leaders brokered a ceasefire. Fighting has continued, however, as the talks have begun • In Colorado, shoppers flocked to buy the world's first legal recreational marijuana. Licences to sell the drug were issued on New Year's Day after voters approved a new state law allowing the production and sale of marijuana to cover recreational uses. Even further afield: Antarctica A penguin looks at the MV Akademik Shokalskiy carrying the Australasian Antarctic Expedition while stuck in pack ice off Cape de la Motte in the Southern Ocean, East Antarctica. Photograph: Laurence Topham for the Guardian • After achieving their goal of reaching explorer Douglas Mawson's huts, our intrepid explorers became stuck in sea ice as they tried to return. After several failed rescue attempts, eventually a Chinese helicopter came to their rescue. An American icebreaker ship is now on its way from Sydney to the Antarctic to free two ships stuck in the ice. Chris Turney, leader of the Australasian Antarctic Expedition, responded to critics in the Observer, stating "This wasn't a tourist trip. It was all about science and was well worth it." • Meanwhile, a 19-year-old set the record for the fastest journey from the Antarctic coast to the south pole Lighter news Nishinoshima Island bears a striking resemblance to Snoopy, the cartoon dog. Photograph: The Asahi Shimbun via Getty Images • A volcanic eruption formed a new Japanese island in the shape of cartoon dog Snoopy • Penelope Keith, Angela Lansbury, Katherine Jenkins and Antony Gormley were the star names in this year's New Year honours list, as women recognised outnumbered men for the first time. You can see the (very long) list here, or look at these charts for an overview • Golfer Rory McIlroy and tennis player Caroline Wozniacki announced their engagement after the Northern Irishman proposed in Sydney • Hawaiian woman Janice "Lokelani" Keihanaikukauakahihulihe'ekahaunaele won a campaign to persuade officials to extend the space available for names on the US state's driving licences • Prince Philip was named among the best-dressed men of the year, according to GQ. Nick Grimshaw topped the list, while Ozwald Boateng was named worst-dressed. • A Welsh village's plans to change its name from Varteg to Y Farteg has been abandoned after opposition from locals who feared it would make them the butt of jokes Final bows Mikhail Kalashnikov with the gun that bears his name. Photograph: Sipa Press/Rex Features • Mikhail Kalashnikov, creator of the AK-47, died at the age of 94 • Eusébio da Silva Ferreira, legendary footballer who played for Portugal, dies aged 71. • Comedian John Fortune, best known for his work with Rory Bremner and John Bird, died at 74. We remembered five of his greatest sketches • Addison Cresswell, the top agent in British comedy, died aged 53 • Wojciech Kilar, who composed the scores for The Pianist and Bram Stoker's Dracula, died at 81 In the world of entertainment Justin Bieber, who announced his retirement on Christmas Eve. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images • Justin Bieber made a lot of Christmas wishes come true when he announced his retirement on Christmas Eve • Shia LaBeouf apologised - again - for plagiarising the work of comic book artist Daniel Clowes for a short film. This time, he hired a skywriter to leave a message in the sky over Los Angeles • Mrs Brown's Boys won the Christmas TV ratings battle despite poor reviews, followed by the eagerly-awaited debut of Peter Capaldi in Doctor Who • Nasa criticised Beyoncé over her use of a sound sample from the Challenger shuttle disaster on her new single XO, calling it 'inappropriate in the extreme' The biggest sport stories Joe Root on his knees after being run out by Mitchell Johnson during day three of the fourth Ashes Test at the MCG. Photograph: Gareth Copley/Getty Images • Australia won the fifth test of the Ashes in a 5-0 whitewash leaving England embarrassed and with their pride bruised. But not as bruised, perhaps, as broadcaster Piers Morgan, who agreed to face an over from Brett Lee after criticising the England team's performance. Morgan later revealed he had fractured a rib • Managerial musical chairs in the Premier League as Tim Sherwood became the new Spurs manager, replacing André Villas-Boas, and then Cardiff City owner Vincent Tan sacked manager Malky Mackay, who has been replaced by Ole Gunnar Solskjaer • Jacques Kallis, arguably the greatest South African ever to play cricket, signed off his remarkable career with a century in his final Test against India • West Brom striker Nicolas Anelka celebrated scoring against West Ham by making a gesture known as the quenelle in tribute to an anti-Zionist friend, French comedian Dieudonné M'Bala M'Bala. Anelka faces a likely five-game ban for the action. He has since agreed not to make the gesture again • We rounded up a panel of experts and asked them to work out who the best footballer in the world is. You can probably guess who they picked The best of the best-of-2013 roundups The Act Of Killing, the Guardian's number one film of the year • Our critics decided that the best film of the year was The Act of Killing. Kanye West's Yeezus took the best album title, and The Returned was picked as the best TV show • You, the readers, voted for Edward Snowden as your person of the year. The story in which he revealed himself as the NSA whistleblower was also our most-read story of the year • The best portraits taken by Guardian photographers • The key pop cultural trends of the year • Think you're on top of all of that? Why not test yourself on this quiz? What next? What will 2014 hold for international news? Photograph: Getty/AP for the Guardian • Our foreign correspondents had a go at predicting the events of 2014. How accurate will they prove? Only time will tell