PJ Harvey's BBC stint featured "people I consider to be highly articulate, stimulating and extremely interesting to listen to, people who challenge us and move us to examine our deepest beliefs and feelings". Photograph: Showbizireland/Getty Images This morning the BBC bravely handed over the Today programme to PJ Harvey as guest editor, clearly unconcerned that she might well use the opportunity to take a piercing look at the burning civil war and witch trial issues of 1647. Instead, in an "unusual" programme, she commissioned business reports from anti-austerity campaigners, organised debates on torture, asked Ralph Fiennes to recite Woody Guthrie lyrics and gave Thought Of The Day over to Julian Assange. These were, as Harvey explained in her opening statement of intent, "people I consider to be highly articulate, stimulating and extremely interesting to listen to, people who challenge us and move us to examine our deepest beliefs and feelings," each choosing their own method of expression, unedited by the BBC. What might have turned into a series of abstract haikus hinting at political discontent in Thom Yorke's hands, three hours of world leaders' personal call-waiting messages in Bono's or one long screaming, SoundLink-shattering diatribe about the aliens controlling the Bilderberg Group in Matt Bellamy's was actually a provocative, shocking and revealing broadcast which tackled topics of financial inequality, oppression, war, torture and censorship head on. Aside from some of the bigger topics, here's what we learnt. Jamie Cullum is a smokescreen At 6.30am we heard a trailer for Cullum's forthcoming programme Piano Pilgrimage, wherein the purse-faced dullard tours the country tinkling away on the UK's best and shiniest pianos. Like Jools Holland with a rucksack, the ad seemed designed by the powers that be to distract us from all the Truth. Or to tarnish all of the country's best pianos. Burn Cullum! Tom Waits doesn't work as a weather forecaster "The world is getting flatter and the sky is falling all around," Waits mumbles as Peej decides to play Strange Weather instead of the rather more helpful regular forecast. So, whether that means hail or apocalypse, I'll need an umbrella, Tom? "I never buy umbrellas 'cause there's always one around". Right. And in summary? "I believe that brandy's mine". Clearly. So that'll be fog and rain with scattered moroseness and a chance of heavy sclerosis later on. Thanks. Now back to the global corruption. Joan Baez knows the horrors of war Reading on mobile? Click here to listen In one of the morning's most moving segments, war photographer and triple amputee Giles Julie frankly discusses the grisly physical and psychological after-effects of battle injuries with injured war veterans, rounded off with Baez's sombre take on the traditional protest song Johnny I Hardly Knew Ye. Twitter falls respectfully silent. Julian Assange is the new Kanye West At least, that's what you begin to think as, in grand Thought For The Day tradition, he quotes Jesus to justify his information revolution, WikiLeaks portrayed as a kind of Niagara Falls of fact, gushing down towards the common man against the traditionally upward flow of knowledge. It's the most controversial part of Harvey's programme, but also the most righteous - "to keep a person ignorant is to keep them in a cage," Assange says, paying respect to the actions of Edward Snowden and attacking governments for aspiring to "a God-like knowledge of each and every one of us." Regular listeners may be up in arms, but give the man his damn croissants. Ralph Fiennes is funky Closing this bold broadcast with a swinging recital of Woody Guthrie's Ticky Tock, Fiennes sounds like Coriolanus doing skat jazz. A fittingly awkward end to three hours of hard-hitting humanitarianism, highlighting how all is askew in the world. Bravo.