A woman from a suburb of Philadelphia who became one of the most notorious examples of “homegrown” terrorism in the US has been sentenced to 10 years in prison for a failed plot to kill a Swedish cartoonist who depicted the head of the prophet Muhammad on the body of a dog. Prosecutors had asked for a very lengthy sentence for Colleen LaRose, 50, of Pennsburg, Pennsylvania, arguing in a legal memorandum released last week that she still presents a danger to the public and that she should be imprisoned for decades to set an example to “other lonely, vulnerable people who might be enticed by online extremists”. However, the court imposed the 10-year sentence in recognition of the co-operation LaRose has given investigators in their pursuit of others involved in the abortive al-Qaida plot. At the sentencing hearing in Philadelphia, LaRose said she was sorry for having acted as she did on the orders of her internet handlers. “I was in a trance and I couldn’t see anything else,” she told the court. Her defence lawyer, Mark Wilson, described the plot for which she was arrested as “more aspirational than operational”. LaRose was arrested in October 2009 after she returned from Sweden, where she had scoped out the possibility of killing the artist Lars Vilks. Without her knowledge, she was already under the surveillance of the FBI – which had been alerted to her online jihadist conversations by the National Security Agency, as the Guardian disclosed in November, based on NSA documents leaked by Edward Snowden. LaRose had become radicalised online, converting to Islam and taking the official name Fatima LaRose and the codename Jihad Jane. A definitive profile by Reuters based on extensive interviews with her in prison while she was awaiting sentencing revealed that she had been raped over a prolonged period of her childhood by her biological father and had later fallen into homelessness and prostitution. She told Reuters that her extremist jihadist handlers had given her a sense of purpose after a terrible upbringing. “I was finally going to be some place where I belonged,” she said. “I’ve survived through a lot of things that rightfully should have killed me.” LaRose’s participation with investigators is likely to prove important in several other cases arising out of the Vilks plot. Her alleged handler, Ali Damache, is in custody in Ireland fighting extradition to the US. Jamie Paul Ramirez, dubbed “Jihad Jamie”, who travelled from her home in Colorado to Ireland, where she married Damache, has pleaded guilty to terrorism charges and is to be sentenced on Wednesday. A third alleged co-conspirator, Mohammad Hassan Khalid, was due to be sentenced on Tuesday but has asked for further time for psychological tests. The youngest person ever to be charged with terrorism inside the US, he is alleged to have engaged with LaRose on the internet when he was just 15.