A disturbing undercurrent of relevance? the British army in Afghanistan today. Photograph: Reuters 2014 will be a decisive year for Britain's armed forces. Or should be. As the House of Commons defence committee has just pointed out, despite its long-standing promise, the government has yet to draw up a coherent national security strategy explaining Britain's role in the world and the purpose and uses of military force. Britain's chief of defence staff, General Sir Nick Houghton, made it clear he wanted to stimulate a serious debate in his Christmas lecture at the Royal United Services Institute (RUSI) last month. So far, officials and ministers at the Ministry of Defence – and the rest of Whitehall, including David Cameron's National Security Council, have shown little appetite for one. Here are some of the key issues that should be preoccupying defence and security policy makers in Britain, and elsewhere, in 2014: • Future help for Afghan security forces after all Nato-led foreign troops end their combat role and in light of Cameron's "mission accomplished" claim. • The future raison d'être of the British army and the armies of other advanced, democracies. • The raison d'être of Britain's Trident nuclear weapons system – with or without Scottish independence. A recent RUSI study warns that Trident will consume a third of the UK's entire military equipment programme for the 2020s and beyond. It estimates Trident will cost between £70bn and £80bn over 25 years. Malcolm Chalmers, author of the report, concludes: "The UK would not become a nuclear-armed state now if it were not one already." • The future of European defence and security cooperation to make better use of smaller budgets earmarked for national armed forces and halt the decline of the continent's influence in the world. • The future role, and control, of drones, or "remotely piloted air systems", as we are now asked to call them. • Terrorism: Syria. More than 200 Britons have travelled to Syria and could return as "hardened terrorists", Richard Walton, head of Scotland Yard's counter-terrorism command warned a London First conference last month. • Terrorism: elsewhere. The spread of extremist groups to what Walton called the "huge expansion of ungoverned spaces". West Africa presents a dangerously toxic mix of drug money, weaponry, and ideological extremism, in Nigeria and neighbouring countries. • Violent conflicts between Sunni and Shia in Iraq and Syria, but spreading violence in Lebanon and elsewhere in the Middle East. (Sunni/Shia conflicts threatening the national "lines in the sand" imposed after the first world war). • Pursuing accommodation with Iran. • Preventing an escalating conflict in southeast Asia of the kind that led European governments into a world war in 1914. • The future activities and accountablity and oversight of the security and intelligence agencies after the revelations of the US whistleblower, Edward Snowden.