Top eight stories on MediaGuardian Breaking Bad and BBC win Golden Globes Brooklyn Nine Nine is surprise best comedy show as Bryan Cranston finally wins for being Walter White Kylie Minogue draws 8.4 million to The Voice BBC talent show pulls in 2 million more viewers than last year thanks to Australian singer who was drafted in for new series UTV faces opposition to Irish TV launch TV3 seeks 'clarity' from broadcasting regulator Benefits Street boss: 'There isn't enough aftercare for people who've been on TV' Richard McKerrow of Love Productions on the C4 show and why he didn't want the Great British Bake Off to leave BBC2 Personalised digital magazine app Flipboard aims for 150 million users Ben Cardew: Company plans enhanced discovery and search tools to explore the 5m magazines already created Can Hollywood Reporter saviour Min put the mojo back into Billboard? David Hepworth: Transformation could be hindered by the demise of music charts and a public perception that the music business is boring TMG made record £60m profit last year Publisher increases profit for third successive year Steve McQueen developing 'epic' BBC drama Drama series will chronicle the lives of a group of friends and their families living in west London from 1968 to the present Top comment on MediaGuardian No hope if Hacked Off can only harangue Ipso Peter Preston: Brian Cathcart, the founder of Hacked Off, greeted the new Independent Press Standards Organisation's selection panel with dispiriting invective Today's headlines The Guardian Kylie Minogue helps attract 8.4 million viewers to third series of The Voice. P5 The readers' editor on … fact-checking in the Guardian's leader columns. P29 Interview with Benefits Street boss Richard McKerrow. P32 Can Hollywood Reporter saviour Janice Min put the mojo back into Billboard? P33 Personalised digital magazine app Flipboard aims for 150 million users. P33 Charlie Brooker on Benefits Street. G2 P5 Lucy Mangan on Sherlock. G2 P21 Daily Telegraph BBC 'spent £20,000 to hush up climate event'. P2 UK's high hopes for Golden Globes. P3 Sherlock review. P7 Richard E Grant admits being anxious ahead of appearing in TV series Girls. P7 Charities condemn Benefits Street. P13 Rebecca Adlington on being in the media spotlight. P23 Alistair McGowan on The Great Sport Relief Bake Off. P27 Financial Times Turkey moves to clamp down on internet. P6 Analysis: Richard Desmond will leave a distinct mark on Channel 5. P20 The Times SFX Entertainment signs radio deal with Clear Channel. P41 The Voice and Sherlock review. Times2 P10 The Independent Kylie Minogue helps The Voice get 2 million more viewers than last year's launch show. P3 Sherlock review. P17 Media's coverage of immigration. P41 Marketing and branding: Coke's crass handling of gay marriage. P41 i Nigel Farage: Do 'Question Time' audiences need to be quite so hostile? P35 Media's coverage of immigration. P55 Who'd want to by Channel 5? P55 BBC sends team of 95 to cover the Winter Olympics. P55 Wall Street Journal Europe Editorial: Edward Snowden may have damaged US interests. P12 Daily Mail Splash! coverage. P3 Paxman beard blamed for shaving sales slump. P5 Sherlock's new foe cited as more evidence of leftwing bias. P7 Jeremy Vine: why do so many drivers want to kill me on my bike? P15 Peter McKay on Benefits Street. P17 Teletubbies considered for export to North Korea. P30 Sherlock review. P53 Daily Express Splash! coverage P9 Kylie Minogue's first appearance on The Voice. P17 Celebrity Big Brother coverage. P25 What happened to the stars of sitcom Happy Days. P27 The Sun Sherlock could be back by next Christmas. P3 Teletubbies considered for export to North Korea. P6 Coronation Street's Bill Roache to appear in court tomorrow. P6 The Voice pulls in peak of 10.6 million viewers. P21 Luisa Zissman hopes to join ITV's Loose Women. TV Biz P1 Splash! coverage. TV Biz P1 Dancing on Ice coverage. TV Biz P1 Celebrity Big Brother coverage. TV Biz P1 The Voice coverage. TV Biz P2 Coronation Street coverage. TV Biz P1 Daily Mirror Kylie Minogue's first appearance on The Voice sends ratings soaring. P3 Tory MP Penny Mordaunt to appear in Splash! P4 Sherlock fans get a shock as Moriarty returns from the grave in last episode. P5 First Muslim family to join Coronation Street. P9 Daily Star Celebrity Big Brother coverage. P1,P4-5 Coronation Street to get its first Muslim family. P1,7 Benefits Street boss proud of 'great TV'. P9 Teletubbies amongst the BBC shows to be sold to North Korea. P24 Go to MediaGuardian